GENERAL
PRINCLIPLES
OF TAI CHI
ERLE MONTAIGUE: 1984
T
A
I
C
H
I
G
E
N
E
R
A
L
P
R
I
N
C
I
P
L
E
S
P
U
B
L
I
S
H
I
N
G
This was Erle Montaigue’s first professionally published book. However, Erle had pub-
lished under his own publishing Company, Moontagu Books, 3 previous books called
Power Taiji Volumes 1, 2 & 3.
We have left out much of the beginning pages as they are repeated in other works on
thissite,likehistoryetc..Wehaveonlyincludedthe‘GeneralPrinciples’ofTaijiquan.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF T’AI CHI
by Erle Montaigue
Illustrated by Jeni Blake
© Text — Erle Montaigue 1984 © Illustrations — Jeni Blake 1984
All rights reserved.
First published in 1984 by Boobook Publications Pty. Ltd., P0 Box 238, Balgowlah,
NSW 2093, Australia
u.s. distribution: china Books and Periodicals, 2929 24th Street, San Francisco, CA
94110
N.Z. distribution: Lindon Publishing, P0 Box 39-225, Auckland west, New Zealand
Typeset by Everysize Typeart Services, Frenchs Forest, NS\N Printed by South~wood
Press, Marrickville, NSW National Library of Australia
ISBN 0908121 09 1
GENERAL POINTS
Hold the head as if suspended from above
Do not tilt the head from side to side, nor up or down. The head
must not turn away from the central axis. Your eyes must do the
looking for you.
In order to avoid a rigid posture imagine a string is holding you up
from above — this will avoid tension in the neck.
The mouth is closed but open
When you are relaxed your lips are lightly closed, but the teeth are
naturally slightly open. If saliva should gather then swallow on the
out breath — this ensures that the “vital elixir” is sent to the
tan-tien.
Breath in through the nose, and out
This is what the nose is for. In on the Yin movement, and out on
the Yang movement; slow and deep, but not forced.
Keep the backbone straight
The spine should always be held with the sac-rum vertical to the
ground. The coccyx should always point to the direction you are
facing i.e. where your centre is pointing. Special attention should
be given to keeping the backbone vertical, especially in the for-
ward and backsitting bow stance. The upper thigh will feel
stressed at first — this is most important for the looseness of the
waist. The legs only do their specific job of holding up your body,
and this allows the waist to do its specific job of directing the
power. (This can be reversed i.e. the legs and waist are able to
swap jobs — this will be dealt with later).
Relax the arms and palms
The arm joints should remain relaxed with only the mind moving
the palms to flex gently.
Relax the shoulders, sink the elbows
The shoulders should be relaxed and dropped down. The elbow
should be dropped under the level of the shoulder to further help
in relaxing the shoulders. Even when the palms are raised above
the head, the shoulders should remain relaxed. This allows the
whole chest area to relax and so the Ch’i can be sunk to the
tantien.
Distinguish between full and empty
This is probably the most important point in t’ai chi. Many people
only think of full and empty in terms of weight i.e. the leg that has
the weight placed upon it is the Yang leg and the weight-less leg is
Yin. But Yin and Yang only exist in a state of change. If one leg has
all the weight placed upon it and the other is weightless, they are
in a state of no-change.
However, if we think of Yang as being when we use power to push
from one leg to the other, then this is true Yang. If we think of Yin
as when we use one leg to receive that power, then this is true Yin.
When our legs are just holding us up, they are doing their job and
are neither Yin or Yang, but when one leg issues power and the
other receives it, then this is the true meaning of distinguishing
between substantial and insubstantial.
We must know exactly which part of our body is issuing power and
which part is receiving it. There are times when the waist is in a
changing state of Yin and the legs are Yang, and there are times
when the waist is Yang and the legs are Yin. In other words, the
waist is sometimes directing and issuing power, and it is impor-
tant to know when this is happening. If the body is unbalanced
then always look for the fault in the waist and legs.
The position of the knees
The most structurally sound position for the knee is when the pa-
tella of the weighted leg is directly over the second or ring toe.
This allows for maximum power with no weak links, and serves to
protect the knee. You must train your waist and hips to turn with-
out moving the knee from its central position — this is especially
important in Push Hands.
Distinguish between waist and hips
When the hips turn, the whole backbone, including the sacrum,
turns and the rotation is in the hip ball joint. When the waist turns,
the sac-rum stays still and the vertebrae above the sac-rum turn.
There are times when the waist turns by itself but at no time do the
hips turn without the waist. These postures are dealt with in the
section on form and Push Hands.
On kicking
The leg joints should always be relaxed so that centrifugal move-
ment will naturally occur. In other martial arts, the muscles of the
legs are used in a tense manner and cause blockages and all
kinds of joint injuries. In t’ai chi we loosen the joints so that when a
kick is being performed, only the waist revolves and because the
leg is relaxed it just flicks out with great speed and power like a
whip cracking. The same principle applies to punching.
Sink the chest, raise the back
The shoulders should be naturally rounded. This will also allow
the chest to be naturally slightly hollowed, which allows the Ch’i to
sink to the tan-tien. If there is strength and expanding of the chest
you will become top heavy.
To raise the back has two meanings; the first is a little esoteric,
meaning the Ch’i sticks to the back and one is able to use this Ch’i
to issue great power. (If the chest is sunk then the back will natu-
rally rise — this does not have to be thought about, it just hap-
pens). The second meaning comes from the practice of Push
Hands when a certain technique is used and the scapula is raised
to stop the technique having its full effect — this is a purely physi-
cal meaning. All the raise back techniques will come with prac-
tice.
Unity of upper and lower
This means that the upper body must not issue strength before or
after the lower body. The whole body must come to the point of
contact at exactly the same time otherwise our energy will be
scattered and useless. The essence of unity is timing — this can
only be gained from experience. This is the meaning of “the
power is rooted in the feet, controlled by the waist and expressed
in the fingers”.
Unity of internal and external
The breath is internal but has an external physical property. We
are able to use this principle to gain complete harmony internally
as well as externally. If we cause our breath to be in harmony with
the movements, the Yang breath with the Yang movement etc..,
then this is one internal property harmonising with an external
property. When the outer breath mixes with the inner breath, Ch’i,
then a fully external property is harmonising with a fully internal
property; so our internal is now said to be in harmony with the ex-
ternal. In order for this to happen we must of course practice us-
ing the right breath for the right movement.
No interruptions
This means that all the movements must be circular even if they
look straight. Even when we use fa-jing movements as in the
Chen style or the old Yang style, the attack must be circular, never
straight out with a stop at the end then back. With circular move-
ments we are said to be moving like a river.
Stillness in movement
In t’ai chi we try to use less energy rather than great shows of
strength which waste the Ch’i. Even when we are moving the
mind is still and to this end we must perform the slower move-
ments as slowly as possible. The fa-jing postures of the old Yang
and Chen styles should not break this rule; the movements are
done with such speed and explosive power that it seems as if they
haven’t been done at all and haven’t used up any energy. The
fa-jing movement should only be there for a split second and then
it relaxes straight back into the very slow and soft movements.
Only in this way when we come to practice the pauchui form are
we able to remain quiet and still within when performing the fast
movements.
Times for practice
The traditional times to practice t’ai chi were at noon and
mid-night but we now use the early morning and late evening, be-
fore retiring to bed. The form is practiced three times at each ses-
sion — the first time for the bones and muscles, the second time
for the mind, and the third time for the spirit.
THE ORIGINALYANG FORMS
GUIDELINES FOR MOVEMENTS
FROM THE YANG CHENG-FU STYLE
& THE YANG LU-CH’AN STYLE
Preparation
Keep the small movements as flowing as the larger, sweeping
ones.
Arn left
In Push Left, make sure the left wrist is firstly in the centre, then
the right wrist is in the centre. Block to the right
Keep the eyes to the front even though the head turns to the North
East. This posture is used to block attacks of great force to the
right lower abdomen.
P’eng
Place the heel before executing the movement. Keep the eyes to
the North, keep shoulder width laterally between the feet. The left
wrist is in the centre. This posture is used to ward off a strong fist
attack from the front or to attack the opponent’s face with a
back-fist while holding his left wrist.
Block left
This posture is the same as Block Right. Turn the head to the
North East, but the eyes look to the East.
Double p’eng
Keep the elbows below the shoulders but level. Drag the left toe
toward you — don’t push the left heel out. Issue the energy from
the left leg with the right leg being Yin. This posture is used as a
guard and downward back-fist to the chin.
Lu or pull backward
Keep the right wrist in the centre by turning the waist. The left
knee is over the left toe and the power comes from the right leg.
The waist controls the direction.
Chee or squeeze forward
The power must come from the left foot which must be in a direct
energy line with the right wrist. Some power is derived from the
waist —this makes the posture a spiral movement, not just a flat
circle. The waist also directs the movement.
Sit back like a monkey
The power comes from the right leg only and is used to block ei-
ther a strangle attack or straight face attack; also to re-attack.
Arn or press
The power comes from the left leg and the mind alone flexes the
hand while trying to breathe out of the centre of the palm. The
power in the palms should not be even — the power should come
from the right palm in direct connection with the rear foot.
Sit back ready
Power comes from the right leg and is used to take the punch from
the left fist and grab it with the left palm. The right fingers are then
free to stab the eyes.
Fishes in eight
The power for this posture comes from the waist and is the first
time in the form where the functions of the waist and legs are re-
versed. The legs direct and the waist issues the power, which is
used to throw the attacker many feet away.
Single whip
The power comes from the right leg with the waist performing its
usual function. The left foot must not be placed down before the
whole body is in the position of attack — this breaks the energy.
Use this posture for blocking and to attack the axila or chest.
Attack front, attack-rear (old Yang style)
The power comes from the waist and the legs direct. This is a
fa-jing movement and is used to block and then attack with both
palms, with great force. USE THE BREATH. Relaxation is of the
utmost importance. Twist the body across the centre.
Lift hands (Yang Ching-Po style)
The power comes from the waist and the arms are used to crush
the opponent’s attacking arm. The previous arm movement is
used to attack two opponents with the backs of the palms. No
weight on the right foot — the right heel is used to kick at the knee
cap or shin.
Pull down and shoulder press
Don’t move the knees from their position over the toes, or turn the
right foot. The right foot and the left palm must work in perfect har-
mony before the strike. The left palm protects the right elbow and
the right palm protects the groin. The shoulder attacks the chest
when the opponent is pulled down.
Stork spreads wings
Power comes from the waist and right leg simultaneously. The
obvious technique is to grab with the left hand and block to the
right side with the right ulna, while kicking to the groin with the
right toe. The main technique of Stork is a most powerful punch to
the temple with the right fist, and block with hand trap by the left
one. The right foot is used to trip or kick. Brush knee and twist step
Power comes from the rear leg as well as the waist and hips. This
is not a push but rather a snap attack to the point of C.V. 14, used
to block a lower attack, either foot or fist, and brush it aside then
re-attack. (Conceptor Vessel 1 4 is a heart point).
Play guitar
Power comes from the left leg and is used to glance block a right
fist and either attack with a left fist or kick to the knee cap or shin.
Step forward, parry and punch
In each case the power comes from the rear e.g.. The right fist
blocks downward while the eft palm is used to attack the chest.
Then the eft palm blocks while the right fist attacks to the heart.
The right fist must snap up at the end.
Pull back
The power comes from the left leg and the waist directs. This
movement is used to break a wrist hold and then re-attack with a
push.
Push
This is the only REALpush in the whole form —power comes from
the rear leg.
Apparent close up
Power comes from the waist and the legs. Used to feint a with-
drawal, but always ready to attack. Can be used to particularly
great advantage in Push Hands.
Fists under elbow (old Yang style)
Power comes from the waist only on the first snap punch and from
the left foot on the second. Used to block face punches and hand
trap to re-attack with a very fast snap upper cut. This is a fa-jing
movement.
Step back and repulse monkey
Power comes from the front leg and must be a push-pull sort of at-
tack. Used to block downward a low punch and to simultaneously
attack to the chest area. Keep the feet a little less than shoulder
width apart.
Tripping repulse monkey (old Yang
style)
Power comes from the waist alone with the legs just propping up
the waist. Keep the centres in a straight line. This posture is used
to block to the rear, then throw the opponent towards the front
while using the rear foot to trip.
Parting the horse’s mane
The power comes from the waist and the thumb is used to attack
the axilla (right thumb in new Yang style, left thumb (in old Yang
style). Swivel both toes in the new Yang style.
Needle at sea bottom
The power comes from the waist. This posture is used either to at-
tack L3 or pull the opponent down, causing him to pull up. (Liver 3
is between the large and second toes). Then use Fan through the
Back.
Fan through the back
The power of the waist as well as the leg power is used here. As
the opponent’s arm is lifted up by the right palm, the tips of the left
fingers are used to stab at the nodes under the arm.
Turn around and chop with fist
The power for the chop with fist comes from the waist. The power
for the palm attack comes from the leg.
Wave hands like clouds
Keep the hips facing the front and let your waist do the turning.
The power comes from the waist when turning to the right and
from the leg when turning to the left. Block down with the outside
palm then attack to the face with the other palm. Or, block up with
the upper forearm and attack to the vital lower parts with the other
palm.
Lift heavens
The power comes from the front foot and is a blocking technique.
High pat on horse
The power is in the waist — a simultaneous block down to the left
with an attack to the face.
Drawing the bow (new Yang style)
The power comes from the right foot. Block with one palm and the
other attacks to the face; or the left palm grabs the opponent’s
wrist while the right one takes the left elbow and throws the oppo-
nent to the ground.
Sitting like a duck Old Yang and Chen styles)
The power comes from the waist in a twisting movement down-
ward and is used to pull the opponent down to the ground. If the
opponent retreats, attack with right or left toe kick.
Separation of right and left feet
One palm grabs the wrist while the foot kicks to the knee or shin
area.
Heel kick
The power comes from the waist and is a snap front heel kick to
the lower abdomen. The power must not come from the kicking
leg.
Punch to groin (old Yang and Chen
styles)
The power comes from the waist, the left hooking fingers lift the
attacker’s kicking leg high over the head causing the attacker to
fall to the ground. At this point the right fist attacks the groin.
Punch to knee (new Yang style)
The power comes from the rear leg and the right fist is aimed at
the on-coming knee.
Double leaping kick (old Yang and Chen
styles)
The power is centrifugal with both feet kicking with power. The
knee snaps upwards. This is a fa-jing posture.
Hit tiger left and right
The power comes from the rear foot. In the new Yang style one fist
is used as a feint while the other punches the kidney area. In the
old Yang and Chen styles the posture was a fa-jing movement
and was a block upward with one arm while the other attacked the
heart or face. Penetration punch (old Yang and Chen styles)
This punch is extremely fast and is between the two hit tiger tech-
niques. The power comes from the waist and is centrifugal in ac-
tion combining the block and punch in one movement.
Double wind through ears, or phoenix
punch
The power comes from the rear foot and is used to crush the op-
ponent’s head down onto the knee. Then as the opponent moves
backwards, both fists crash down onto the temples.
Side kick (old Yang and Chen styles)
The power comes from the right leg; after evading to the ground,
kick to the knee cap or shin area.
Double knife finger (old Yang style)
The power comes from the waist and is a block and attack with the
same position of palms to the C.V.14 point and also to the lower
abdomen or the groin.
Play guitar No. 2 Old Yang style)
The power comes from lifting the waist and is used to break the
arm of the attacker upwards. Single phoenix punch and block (old
Yang style)
The power comes from the waist and is centrifugal. The posture is
a punch to the right or left temple, and is circularin execution. Use
both forearms to block a low kick.
Slant flying
There is a shoulder stroke before each Slant Flying, so the power
for this posture comes from the rear leg. The power for the Slant
Flying comes from the waist and is used to push the opponent
over (there are many uses for Slant Flying).
Fair lady works at shuttles
The power comes from the waist for the block, and from the rear
foot for the attack. Attack is to the chest area.
Artful snakehand creeps down No.1
The power comes from the waist and is used as an attack to the
groin and for evasion. No. 2 Snake Creeps Down is used to pull
the opponent down with great power that comes from the front
leg.
Cock stands on one leg
The power comes from the rear leg and is used to block an attack
then re-attack with palm or knee. The second time it is used to
grab the throat and attack the groin.
Natural repulse monkey (old and new
Yang styles)
The power comes from the front foot. The posture is used to block
downwards and at the same time attack the chest or face.
Inspection of horse’s mouth
The power comes from the rear leg and is used to block down-
wards and at the same time attack to the throat with the tips of the
fingers.
Dragon flips tail (old Yang and Chen
styles)
The power is centrifugal and is a right crescent kick. The knee
must remain relaxed.
Spear hand thrust (old Yang style)
The power comes from the waist and is used to simultaneously
attack to the front with spear hand and to the rear with punch.
Evade and bend backwards (old Yang
and Chen styles)
The power comes from the waist; used to evade by lowering the
body and either blocks or attacks with elbow.
Double wrist lock (old Yang style)
The power comes from the waist in bending down and is used to
lock the wrist while your left elbow attacks the opponent’s right el-
bow.
Clown acting (old Yang and Chen styles)
Hidden hand punch is used to trap the palm and then attack with a
punch. The power comes from the waist.
Sleeves dancing like plum blossoms (old
Yang and Chen styles)
The movement is totally centrifugal with the whole body spinning
round like a windmill. The left arm blocks as the right arm attacks.
Step forward to seven stars
The power comes from the rear leg and is used to block high,
while the right foot is used to kick to the groin or shins.
Ride tiger back to mountain
In the new Yang style this is the same as for Stork Spreads Wings,
but in the old Yang style it is used to block a kick with the left palm
while stepping out of the way. The same applies for the Wu style.
Lotus kick
The power comes from the waist and is used to firstly block and
then “break the lotus root” by kicking and attacking with the arms
in opposite directions.
PUSH HANDS
SINGLE PUSH HANDS
First, start with the legs and work up. Without strong legs you can
forget the Push Hands practice. The knees must always stay over
the second toe on the Yang or heavy leg; this is the most structur-
ally sound position for the leg. Even when turning the waist the
knee must not move from this position. The light knee may move,
but only backwards and forwards. Power comes from the front leg
when moving back, and from the rear leg when moving forward.
There must be a constant pressure between the two players.
Loosen the waist
The waist must be so loose that when the P’eng arm is pushed,
the waist and hips just move with the push to either side like a bi-
cycle wheel on its axis — the P’eng arm is the wheel and the head
is the axis. Never allow your wheel to buckle.
Listen with the wrist
Your wrists are your ears in combat. The direction of force, and
how much power to use is determined by the wrists, which are
your centre. Never change direction in mid-stream otherwise you
will be defeated. Make up your mind and then stick to it. When us-
ing a certain martial technique ask yourself, “If I used this tech-
nique against a master, would it work?’.
Never break contact; this may work when executed very quickly
while playing with someone less experienced than yourself, but
you must think as if pushing with a master.
Sink
Probably the most important thing to remember is ‘sink’. Every
time you move from rear to front, or from front to rear, sink and aim
for the opposite foot. In this way you won’t be caught off balance
with a pull. When attacking, curl the rear toes under to bring more
Ch’i into the rear leg. Feel a line between the rear foot and the at-
tacking palm. Sink your shoulders and be strong in your stance.
Push with the legs, pull & strike with the
waist
The power for the push comes from the rear leg while the power
for the pull down comes from the waist. However, we practice
pushing hands to develop great power in our attacks, instantly
from very short distances. So with this in mind, using centrifugal
force, the power for these movements at an advanced level co-
mes from the waist only.
Keep the wrist in the centre as you push or pull, by turning the
waist into it. Keep the back straight and the buttocks turned under
at all times — in this way the power in the waist is not lost but con-
nected directly to the palms from the rear foot.
If the attack is to the left of your centre then turn your waist to the
left, keeping your wrist in the centre. If the attack is to the right of
your centre then turn your waist to the right. If the power comes di-
rectly into the centre then turn to your “closed” side. Right leg for-
ward, right side is closed and left is open.
Keep the unbendable arm and the im-
movable elbow
Never allow your wrist to come any more than 90 degrees into
your chest. BUT only use the right muscle for the job — no tension
must be used in any other muscle. The fingers must always be re-
laxed. In this way we route the oncoming energy straight back to
the rear foot.
Be wary at each change
The time for caution comes just between the opponent’s change
from Yin to Yang.
Use constant energy
When changing feet, and the punch to the face or stomach is
used, be certain not to use a jerking step. Place the heel down
easily with complete control.
Keep the back straight and vertical
The waist and hips will not turn in the correct manner if the back is
not vertical to the ground. This gives you complete grounding.
The head is straight
The head should not move, the chin is tucked in to keep all your
centres in line.
________________________________________________________
DOUBLE PUSH HANDS
Use the same guidelines for Single Push Hands, especially those
related to the feet and waist. I have not covered the advanced
method of ‘P’eng/Hinge’ Push Hands here.
Open and closed are different
In Double Push Hands we have two different sides which can be
used at anytime. If the right foot is forward the closed side is your
right side and you must use more P’eng to that side. You use less
P’eng to the open side because you are moving your centre away
to the right. When using P’eng to the closed side make the fore-
arm more to the diagonal upward; when using P’eng to the open
side make the forearm more parallel to the ground.
In pull back use the waist
Never sit right back onto the rear leg before using Lu; the move-
ment must come at exactly the same time as the posture comes
into place. The right wrist (if Lu on the closed side) must be in the
centre.
The power for Pull Back comes from the waist. The left fingers
may be used to stab at the eyes so be ready for that to happen.
The right palm might be used to slap the face after a feint pull back
(or the left if on the other side). Bend Backwards or Slant Flying
might also be used at this point. Look at your opponent’s whole
body out of your peripheral vision (Seven Stars).
Chee (squeezing)
In using Chee (or press) be certain that the opponent does not
suspect. Chee is used to great advantage to hurl your opponent
many feet away.
Arn (press)
Some people call this ‘push’. Make sure the power is not in both
palms as this is double weighting. One palm is used to sense.
This technique is used to send your opponent many feet away
and is usually used after Chee. The movement sends the attacker
spinning. Keep the buttocks tucked under. The power for Chee
and Arn comes from the rear leg and is directed by the waist.
Central equilibrium
This is the most important position. Without it we are easily de-
feated. This is very important when neutralising after being at-
tacked by Elbow or Chee.
Pull
Pull uses “inch energy” and is used instead of Pull Back or Lu. The
one palm is used to jerk the opponent’s wrist backwards. This is
not used for pulling off balance but to dislocate the elbow or shoul-
der. The other palm can be used on top of the pulling palm.
Split
This is used to throw the attacker completely off balance in a spin-
ning fashion. The power comes from the waist and legs and is
used instead of Lu or Pull.
Kao or shoulder
This technique is used to great advantage just after P’eng and be-
fore Lu. The timing and the distance must be correct as Kao only
works over a short distance. The power comes from the rear leg.
Elbow
If Kao is the cannon, then Elbow is the handgrenade. It is used on
being pulled back, and is aimed at the mid-section. The power co-
mes from the rear leg and waist.
Use Chee after pull back
After being pulled back, and if you are pulled
onto to the opponent’s open side, then use
Chee into his mid-section for great advantage.
Be certain that the timing is right.
__________________________________________________
Extra techniques
When using fast punches, always make sure that the opponent’s
other hand is trapped first. In kicking to the knee or shin, be cer-
tain that you use a feint to take the opponent off guard.
Follow up
Don’t just leave a technique after it has been used — always have
in mind the follow up and be careful that the opponent has not de-
tected it.
Allow the opponent to move
Never attack first; allow the opponent to move first and use, stick
to and follow to defeat. This means loosening the waist and hav-
ing a solid foundation in the feet. The energy is rooted in the feet.
DA-LU OR MOVING PUSH
HANDS
The four corners are practiced in Da-Lu and the mind must act
very quickly.
In an advanced stage the Da-Lu becomes Push Hands and the
Push Hands becomes Da Lu, so the same points apply as for
Push Hands.
At a very advanced stage the Push Hands becomes totally free
and any technique can be used at any time. Loose the shoulders,
keep the chin in and sink the energy to the tan-tien. Know where
the energy is coming from and how to use the whole and every
part of the body to your advantage.
PAUCHUI
FORM
AND
SAN-SAU
The fighting arts of t’ai chi ch’uan
PAUCHUI
In pauchui (old Yang and Chen styles), make sure that the fa-jing
movements are totally subconscious, like sneezing. Use the
technique as if your life depended upon being able to issue abso-
lute and full power the moment that the technique is released.
Never have any tension before or after the technique.
When executing the slower full techniques have internal power
and breathe out with the technique. Always balance the fast with
the slow — this way we use up less energy. In most cases, the at-
tack is like a whip; there is a great deal of power behind it but it is
concentrated in one small point of impact. RELAX. Whip the wrist.
Whip the foot.
SAN-SAU
When we put the pauchui forms together in a two person sparring
match we call it san-sau or free hands. In the beginning it is not to-
tally free because we must first learn how to use the techniques.
Keep it slow and see how each technique is used to either attack
or to defend. After some time speed up the movements and intro-
duce some more power. This is not a contest so keep it easy.
After many years you may put some of the techniques out of sync
until it becomes a free sparring match. The free fighting part must
not come too soon as you will forget all about the technique and it
will become a brawl.
You must have these techniques so imprinted on your sub-con-
scious that they can be called upon in any situation.
