 
Tàijíquán – True to the Art
Wee Kee Jin

Dedication
This book is dedicated to my late Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan, who imparted to 
me the knowledge of the art of Tàijíquán.
All my students, whom accompany me on my journey of taijiquan, pointing out to 
scenery that I might have missed.
To my wife, Janice (Siah Ait Tiang), sons Andy Wee Inn Siang, Louis Wee Inn Tze, 
Jamie Wee Inn Zheng, and Francis Wee Inn Yu, all of whom support me in my 
journey.
 
Acknowledgement with thanks to Paul Fretter, Sarah Stenson, Dean Cudmore and 
all those who have contributed to the publication of this book.

Contents
The Quality of 
1.	
Tàijíquán Today ........................................................... 7
The Roadmap to the Hall of 
2.	
Tàijíquán .............................................. 11
The Chang San Feng 
3.	
Tàijí Classic ....................................................... 15
The Wang Ts’ung Yueh 
4.	
Tàijí Classic ................................................... 19
The Song of the Thirteen Postures 
5.	
................................................... 27
The Understanding of the Thirteen Postures 
6.	
................................... 39
The Song of 
7.	
Tuīshoǔ .......................................................................... 49
The Song of Substance and Function 
8.	
................................................ 63
Important Points of the Yang Family 
9.	
................................................ 69
The Body of 
10.	
Tàijíquán ....................................................................... 75
The Practice and Cultivation of the 
11.	
Tàijíquán Form .......................... 81
The Application of 
12.	
Tàijíquán .............................................................. 83 
The Art of Partner Work in 
13.	
Tàijíquán ................................................ 93
 
14.	 Fājìn  - Discharging or Releasing the Relaxed Force ......................... 99
Yielding and Neutralising 
15.	
................................................................ 101
 
16.	 Tàijíquán the Art of Receiving ........................................................ 105
My 
17.	
Tàijí Journey .............................................................................. 111
Stories told by Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan 
18.	
................................... 125

Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   7
The Quality of 
1.	
Tàijíquán Today
The founder of Yi Chuan, teacher Wang Shen Cai, once commented that the quality 
of Tàijíquán today has gone downhill and that he hopes one day a practitioner 
will be able to restore it to its former standard and glory. Of course, most Tàijí 
practitioners are offended by his comment, but I do not think that he is arrogant 
in his remark as there will not be a reaction without an action. Li Ya Xuan, a 
senior student of Yang Cheng Fu of whom Cheng Man Ching spoke highly, said 
that ninety-nine per cent of Tàijí practitioners practice incorrectly. Unlike Wang 
Shen Cai, he gave the reason, he said it is because they do not follow the Tàijí 
classics in their practice. Looking into the Tàijí circle today, we will find that his 
comment is justified and, instead of being offended, we should look at the causes 
and find a remedy for them, as it is the duty of every Tàijí practitioner to improve 
the quality of Tàijíquán.
Tàijíquán was brought out of the Chen village by Yang Lu Chang, the founder 
of the Yang style and it was propagated throughout China by his grandson Yang 
Cheng Fu, and Wu Chien Chuan the founder of the Wu style. It was then brought 
out of China to other parts of Asia, America and Europe by Tung Ying Chieh, Cheng 
Man Ching, Wu Kung Yi and their students.
In the late nineteen sixties, seventies and the eighties, the government of mainland 
China began the mass promotion of Tàijíquán in order to promote health among 
its population. Various different Tàijí forms were created based on movements 
from the traditional styles. In most of these new forms the movements were 
simplified, and it was done by people who had no in-depth understanding of 
Tàijíquán. Their movements were based on the beauty of the performance rather 
than the principles of Tàijíquán. We just have to look at Tàijí competitions, when 

 8   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   9
all the ‘champions’ are performing their Tàijí form it looks more like a dance than 
Tàijíquán.
 The present day Tàijí could be divided into five categories:-
Tàijí Exercise
1.	
 - This is commonly found in municipal parks in Asia, but 
it also includes people anywhere in the world that do the Tàijí form as 
a movement without any Tàijí principles within it. Although it is better 
than taking no exercise at all, it is definitely not Tàijíquán.
Tàijí Dance
2.	
 -This is the, so called, Tàijíquán promoted by the Wushu 
Federation in China and Wushu Organisation outside China. It has 
beautiful movements and posture, the movement flows like a dance 
(occasionally the practitioners pause the performance at a beautiful 
posture for the audience to take photographs) but it does not have 
any Tàijí principles in it. Most of the so-called Tàijí champions in wushu 
competitions fall into this category.
Holy Tàijí
3.	
 - This is most commonly found in the West, where the teacher 
who has practiced other forms of meditation combines them with Tàijí 
form. While neglecting the Tàijí principles, they make yin and yang into 
something mystical and bring other spiritual practices into it. The teachers 
in this category often promote ‘guru worship’ and in this group you often 
find ‘gurus’ and ‘followers’, rather than teachers and students.
Tàijí 
4.	
go¯ngfu¯ -These are mainly practitioners of other internal and external 
martial arts that have taken up Tàijí. Although they are practicing the 
Tàijí form, they talk about the principles but never apply them. When it 
comes to the application in pushing-hands they only use the techniques 
of the other arts they have learned and discard completely the Tàijí 
principles.
Tàijíquán
5.	
 - In this category the practitioners study and investigate the 
classics of Tàijí diligently. They put every principle of Tàijí in their Tàijí 
forms and pushing-hands, are always looking deeper into the principles 
and follow the traditional way of teaching and learning. Usually, regardless 
of what style of Tàijí they are, they only stick to one style and system and 
pursue the Tàijí principles and Dao through their life. Sadly this category 
makes up a very small percentage of Tàijí practitioners.
Taking the Journey into the Art of Tàijíquán
Before embarking on a journey into the art of Tàijíquán, one should understand 
the difference between Tàijí and other martial arts. Tàijí is not only a martial art; 
it is also an exercise for health and a philosophy of life. There are many other 
exercises which focus on developing the physical body, but neglect to train the 
mind, and there are meditations which focus on developing the mind but not 
the body. As an exercise Tàijí develops (cultivates) both the mind and the body. 
Although yoga also develops both the mind and body, unlike Tàijí, yoga is not a 
martial art.
The philosophy of Tàijí is based on the I Ching (The book of Changes) and its 
application as a martial art is similar to The Art of War by Sun Tze.
It is perhaps as a martial art that Tàijíquán really stands out from the others. 
The commonly understood concepts in martial arts, and generally in human 
thinking are that: the at the strong overcomes the weak, the fast overcomes 
the slow, the hard overcomes the soft, and we use brute force and resistance 
against an incoming force.  In the practice of Tàijíquán the emphasis is on the 
weak overcoming the strong, the slow overcoming the fast, the soft overcoming 
the hard, using the mind and not brute force and when there is a force, then 
yielding to it. Because in Tàijíquán the emphasis is totally the opposite of what 
one would normally (habitually) do, the practitioners and would-be practitioners 
of Tàijíquán must not use a conventional mind-set and methods to understand 
and train it. This is most obvious when novices, other martial artists, and even 
many Tàijí practitioners watch a video of great Tàijí masters bouncing people 
off to a great distance with both feet of these people off the ground, and they 
comment that it is fake. That is because they only use a conventional mind-set to 
understand Tàijíquán. While other martial arts rely on speed and strength (brute 
force), Tàijíquán relies on skill and wisdom. When most martial art practitioners 
pass their mid forties they start to go downhill, but a Tàijíquán practitioner’s 
skill continues to refine and it is unhindered by age. It truly deserves the name 
Tàijíquán, translated as the “Supreme Ultimate Fist”, which can only be practiced 
using wisdom (mind) not brawn (brute force).

 10   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   11
The Road Map to the Hall of 
2.	
Tàijíquán
When driving in an unfamiliar city, we need a road map to guide us to our 
destination so that we don’t drive in circles and miss our destination. Similarly, 
in the practice of Tàijíquán there are sets of Tàijí Classic (principles of Tàijíquán) 
to guide us into ’the hall of Tàijíquán’. What has caused the level of Tàijí to 
deteriorate to such a state that prompted Wang Shen Cai and Li Ya Xuan to make 
such a negative comment? 
Most Tàijí practitioners of today are oblivious to the existence of the Tàijí classics. 
Some of them may know that in Tàijí you must be upright, relaxed and use the 
hips to turn, but these are only a small part of the principles. Others talk about 
the principles but do not put them into practice.
The learning of Tàijíquán and the studying of the Tàijí classics must go hand in 
hand, right from the beginning. You do not learn the Tàijí movements of the form 
and then try to look for the principles in the movements. On the contrary, you 
should read the classics and when you practice the Tàijí form, put the principles 
into the movements. This raises the question of how we put the principles into 
the movements, and the answer is also found within the classics. In The Song of 
The Thirteen Postures it says “The flow of the qì and the mind are the emperor 
(commander), the flesh and bones (physical body) are the subjects”. When the 
emperor gives the order, the subject must obey and, if the emperor does not give 
the order, the subject will not know what to do. Therefore during the practice 
of the Tàijí form the mind must ask and the body must respond. Whichever 
principle the mind ‘asks for’ at a given moment, the body must respond to it. 
After prolonged practice it will become a habit and become natural.

 12   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   13
It is more than a matter of simply reading the Tàijí classics; as practitioners we 
must study them carefully and ask ourselves what each of the classics is trying to 
tell us. The interesting thing about the Tàijí classics is that our own understanding 
of the same sentence will evolve and change as we progress to a different level, 
and sometimes the meaning could become the complete opposite of what was 
understood previously. In the practice of Tàijíquán, there will be certain things 
you may have listened to or looked at, but if you are not at that level then you 
won’t really hear or see. You can only say that you understand the principles if 
your body can experience it, otherwise your understanding is only theoretical. 
Even when your body and mind can experience a principle, you should always 
ask yourself if you can further refine it. Only then can one continue to refine; for 
if one has the attitude of “I’ve got it” then one will stop progressing.
Regardless of the apparent differences between various styles of Tàijíquán, they 
are all based on the same sets of Tàijí classics, which are:
1) Chang San-Feng Tàijí Classic
2) Wang Ts’ung-Yueh Tàijí Classic
3) The Song of Thirteen Postures
4) The Understanding of the Thirteen Postures
5) The Song of Tuīshoǔ  (Pushing-hands)
6) The Song of Substance and Function (by Cheng Man Ching).
7) Important Tàijí Points from the Yang family (for Yang Style practitioners)

 14   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   15
 
3.	
Tàijí  Classic (i) : Chang San-Feng
1.	
At the moment of movements, the body should be light, agile and most 
importantly connected together [synchronised].
2.	
The qì should be stimulated and the shén (spirit) gathered within.
3.	
Do not have deficient places.  
Do not have any hollow or protruding places.  
Do not have disconnected places.
4.	
The root [of the relaxed force] is in the feet, discharged through the legs, 
controlled by the waist, and expressed through to the fingers.  
From the feet through the legs to the waist, should be one flow of qì.
5.	
 When moving forwards and backwards you should be in the right position 
and the right moment.  
When not in the right position or the right moment, and the body 
becomes disrupted, the fault should be sought in the waist and legs.
6.	
Up or down, forwards and backwards, left or right, are all the same.  
All these are within the mind and not physically manifested.
7.	
If there is up, there must be down. If there is forwards there must be 
backwards. If there is left, there must be right. If the mind has an upward 
intention, simultaneously it must have a downward intention.
8.	
In lifting the opponent, first connect down, by doing so breaking the root, 
so that he can be plucked out in a flash of a moment.
太 極 拳 論
1.	 一舉動，周身俱要輕靈， 
尤須貫串。
2.	 氣宜鼓盪，神宜內斂。
3.	 無使有缺陷處。 
無使有凹凸處。 
無使有斷續處。
4.	 其根在腳，發於腿。 
主宰於腰，形於手指。 
由腳而腿而腰，總須完整一氣。
5.	 向前退後，乃能得機得勢。 
有不得機得勢處，身便散亂。 
其病必於腰腿求之。
6.	 上下前後左右皆然。 
凡此皆是意，不在外面。
7.	 有上即有下，有前則有後，有左則有右。 
如意要向上，即寓下意。
8.	 若將物掀起，而加以挫之之力。 
斯其根自斷，乃攘之速而無疑。

 16   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   17
9.	
Substantial and insubstantial should be clearly differentiated.  
In every part there is both substantial and insubstantial.  
The principle of substantial and insubstantial applies to every situation.
10.	 The whole body should be connected together, joint by joint like string.  
Do not allow the slightest disruption.
11.	 The chángquán (long fist: an earlier description of Tàijíquán) practitioner is 
like a river or ocean, continuously flowing and rolling without end.
12.	 The 13 Postures are: péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back),  jĭ (press), and àn 
(push), căi (pluck), liè (split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on) 
represent the eight trigrams.
13.	 Step forward, sit backward, look left, look right and central equilibrium 
relate to the five elements.
14.	 Pèng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back),  jĭ  (press), and àn (push) relate to qián, kūn, 
kăn and lí. These represent the four cardinal directions.
15.	 Căi (pluck), liè (split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on) relate to xùn, 
zhèn, duì and gĕn, being the four diagonals.
16.	 Step forward, sit backward, look left, look right and central equilibrium 
are represented by metal, wood, water, fire, and earth respectively. All 
together these make up the thirteen postures.
17.	 The original annotation: This classic was left by the [legendary] founder, 
Chang San-Feng of Wudang mountain. The intended purpose was for the 
followers to attain health and longevity, not just for combat.
9.	 虛實宜分清楚。 
一處有一處虛實， 
處處總此一虛實。
10.	 周身節節貫串， 
無令絲毫間斷耳。
11.	 長拳者，如長江大海， 
滔滔不絕也。
12.	 掤
擠按採列肘靠， 
此八卦也。
13.	 進步退步左顧右盼中定，此五行也。
14.	 掤
擠按，即乾坤坎離，四正方也。
15.	 採列肘靠，即巽震兌艮，四斜角也。
16.	 進退顧盼定，即金木水火土也。 
合之則為十三勢也。
17.	 原註云。此係武當山張三丰祖師遺論。 
欲天下豪傑延年益壽。不徒作技藝之末也。

 18   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   19
Discussion on: Chang San-Feng Tàijí Classic
1.	
We can only concern ourselves with agility and the internal changes once 
the body is balanced and relaxed, and there is zhōngzhèng (centre of 
equilibrium). The foundation of agility is to be relaxed. The Chinese character 
in this verse of the classic means ‘light’, but the same character when placed 
in different sentences can have a different meaning. In this instance ‘light’ 
means relaxed, and to be relaxed is to let go of any unnecessary tension 
when in position and in movement. Also, it is important to note that ‘relaxed’ 
in this context does not mean being soft and floppy. When you have agility, 
you can be lively in your movements and that will give you the ability to have 
whole-body synchronization in the movement. In the Chinese language, the 
characters light (relaxed), agile and lively always go together. To be agile the 
body must maintain its centre while in position, as well as during transition. 
Synchronization requires an understanding of the sequence of changes 
that create the movements, so they occur in relation to one another as 
connected movements, and not just coordinated actions. Only when the 
posture is totally connected and the movements are synchronised will there 
be a continuous flow in the movements.
2.	
‘The mind motivates the qì ‘, describes using the awareness to stimulate 
the qì and circulate it throughout the body, and the Chinese character 
shén (spirit) in this context means awareness. As an internal art, the mind 
awareness should be kept within the body to feel and understand the 
changes in the movements, and to cultivate the awareness of the relaxation 
and sinking. The shén (spirit - focus) should also remain within to prevent 
your attention wandering. You will only have relaxation and sinking if you 

 20   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   21
have an awareness of it taking place, and it will not happen if you are only 
thinking of it. The mind awareness will also enable you to cultivate putting 
the Tàijí principles into your body and your movements, and as you progress 
in your Tàijí practice, your movements will become internalised.
3.	
Deficiencies in Tàijí include not maintaining the zhōngzhèng (centre of 
equilibrium), not being sōng (relaxed), not turning from the kuà (hips) and 
yāo (waist) and being dun (disconnected). In tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands) using 
lí (brute strength), resisting, not sticking or adhering are also deficiencies. To 
avoid deficiencies, every word in the Tàijí classics should be strictly followed. 
Therefore, both the physical postures and the movements should adhere 
completely to the Tàijí classic. When one movement is not complete and the 
practitioners move on to the next movement it is considered to be a hollow. 
On the other hand, if a movement is overdone then that is protruding. In 
the Wang Tsúng-Yueh classic it is stated, “It must not be overdone or fall 
short”. If, in the practise of Tàijíquán, the practitioner does not adhere to all 
the Tàijí classics in the Tàijí form or pushing-hands, then the practitioner has 
deficiencies in his or her practise.
	
4.	 The yŏngquán (bubbling well) in the feet is the root of the body structure. 
When the feet are firmly grounded (rooted) you connect to “borrow the 
energy of the earth”, and any incoming force can then be neutralised 
by being emptied into the ground. The upper body will be free to relax, 
becoming agile and able to maintain the zhōngzhèng (central equilibrium) 
with ease. 
	
The ‘Song of Substance and Function’ states that, “if the yŏngquán (bubbling 
well) has no root, the yāo (waist) has no control”. To cultivate the root in the 
feet, it is essential to relax the toes, not grip the floor, distribute the weight 
evenly over the whole sole, and soften the arch until the yŏngquán is in 
contact with the ground. 
	
Whenever practising chén (sinking) in the Tàiji form, the mind awareness 
must be sent into the feet, through the yŏngquán (bubbling well), and 
projected deep into the ground. Sinking enables the practitioner to cultivate 
the root in Tàijíquán.
	
Once the feet are firmly rooted, bring the jìn (relaxed force) up through 
the legs. The yāo (waist), is positioned by turning from the hips, and 
this determines the direction of the discharge of relaxed force. The jìn is 
then transferred into the upper body by drawing under the tail-bone and 
keeping the hips seated, into the arms by ‘melting’ the upper body  and 
dropping the shoulders, and then through the palms and into the finger-
tips. As stated in the Tàijí classic The Understanding of the Thirteen Postures, 
“When executing fājìn (releasing the relaxed force) the body should sink and 
completely relax”. Therefore when releasing (discharging) the relaxed force, 
the feet, the calf and thigh muscles, the body, arms and palms must be 
completely relaxed and the sinking process must continue.
	
From the feet to the legs and into the waist is a continuous synchronised 
movement and wave of mind awareness, and therefore one flow of qì 
without a break.
	
Importantly, when releasing the relaxed force in any posture of the Tàijí 
form, there should not be any decrease of connection of the feet with the 
ground, otherwise no force can be borrowed from the earth. You should 
clearly feel the force being released through the legs without exerting 
unnecessary effort. There shouldn’t be any increase of tension in the arms, 
palms or even fingers. In tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands) the force is issued from 
the legs, and the only functions of the arms and hands are sticking, adhering 
and listening. As Professor Cheng Man Ching says, “when you push (issue 
the force), push as if you are pushing with the legs”.
5.	
If moving forwards and backwards is awkward, there will be a disconnection 
that prevents the body from moving as one. The cause is likely to be the 
position of the legs in relation to the upper body, or the yāo (waist) having 
lost its mobility due to the kuà (hips) not being seated into the pelvic sockets. 
Tàijí movements are synchronised whole body movements, not regional 
or independent movements. Turning must always be from the kuà (hips) 
and yāo (waist) otherwise the body becomes locked and the movement 
will be disconnected. All other Tàijí movements begin from the base. 
Cheng Man-Ching also said that “adjustments must be initiated from the 
legs”, and that “the legs are yáng, the upper body is yīn”. Even the slightest 

 22   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   23
response and adjustment begins from the legs and it must be a whole body 
synchronisation.
6.	
Sometimes in Tàijí, up, down, forwards, backwards, left and right are not 
physical movements, but only mind intentions. [These are the internal 
representations of the four cardinal directions]
7.	
Everything is relative to its opposite. If there is yīn, there is yáng; if there 
is up, there must also be down; if there is forwards, there must also be 
backwards; and if there is left, there must also be right.
	
In tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands) when you draw someone up to a point where 
they begin to lose connection, they will most likely withdraw downwards. 
When you draw people forwards beyond their centre, they will attempt to 
sit back. When you lead people to the left further than their balance allows, 
they are likely to turn back to the right. In all of these situations the moment 
of change of direction presents an opportunity where the opponent can be 
easily toppled.
	
To maintain grounding and a connection to your own (and opponent’s) 
root, as the mind has an upward intention there must simultaneously be 
another wave of mind awareness sent deep into the earth. Otherwise, you 
will actually be uprooting yourself.
8.	
To lift an opponent you first must send your mind awareness into the ground 
under your feet and, when you are connected in your own feet, then your 
force will also be in the feet of the opponent to break the root (this process 
is the same as you are sinking in the Tàijí form). Once the root is broken, 
pushing in any direction is an easy matter.
9.	
Substantial and insubstantial are not referring to weight distribution, but force 
distribution. Wherever there is force, whether on oneself or the opponent, 
it is substantial - yáng, and where there is no force it is insubstantial - yīn. It 
is essential to distinguish both your own and your partner’s substantiality 
and insubstantiality. When executing fājìn (releasing the relaxed force) from 
the right substantial foot, the principle of cross-alignment requires that 
it is transmitted through the left substantial arm, and vice-versa. The jìn 
(relaxed force) should be directed into the root of the opponent, which is 
located beneath their substantial foot. When the opponent’s substantial 
force contacts any part of your body, that point must immediately become 
insubstantial. Substantial and insubstantial are not simply one being left and 
the other right, or similarly up and down, but both are present in every 
part of the body, constantly interchanging, re-balancing and adjusting to 
the situation. Substantial and insubstantial have no fixed place or time and 
they change with the movement and the situation. Throughout the Tàijí 
form the substantial and insubstantial changes with the movement, and in 
pushing-hands your own substantial and insubstantial should change with 
the opponent’s movement.
10.	 To achieve a whole body synchronisation, every part of the body must move 
and change while connected to, and in relation with, each other. When 
complete synchronisation is achieved there is no likelihood of disconnection 
and when the movements are synchronised then there are no gaps for the 
opponent to take advantage of. In the Song of Tuīshoˇu it says,” When the 
upper and lower body is moving in synchronisation, it is difficult for your 
opponent to come in”.
11.	 In ancient times Tàijíquán was referred to as chángquán (long fist). Regardless 
of name, when a practitioner performs the form or tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands), 
their movements should be like the rolling flow of the river, never ending 
and leaving no gap for an opponent to enter. The circulation of qì (vital 
energy) is comparable to the currents and tides of the ocean, and the jìn 
(relaxed force) generated, relates to the waves and surf.
12.	 Péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back), jĭ (press) and àn (push), căi (pluck), liè (split), 
zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on) are the four cardinal directions and 
four diagonal directions respectively. Together they make up the eight 
trigrams.
13.	 Step forward, move backward, look left, look right, central equilibrium, 
equate to the five elements; Look right (metal), look left (wood), move 
backward (water), move forward (fire) and central equilibrium (earth). Step 
forward, move backward, look left, look right and central equilibrium are 
the external, while the internal are sticking, joining, adhering, following, 
non-resisting and non-disconnecting.

 24   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   25
14.	 Péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back), jĭ (press) and àn (push) relate to qiàn, kūn, 
kǎn and lí. These represent the four cardinal directions, which are ward-off 
(south), push (north), roll back (west) and press (east). The external is the 
cardinal directions and the internal are the ward off, roll back, press and 
push forces.
15.	 Căi (pluck), liè (split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on) relate to xùn 
(wind), zhèn (thunder), duì (swamp or lake) and gěn (mountain). These 
represent the four oblique directions, which are lean-on or shoulder (south-
west), elbow (north-east), split (south-east) and pluck (north-west). The 
external are the oblique directions and the internal are the pluck, split, 
elbow and shoulder forces.
16.	 Together, the four cardinal directions, the four oblique directions and the 
five elements, make up the classical thirteen postures.
17.	 A notation on the original document states that, “this ‘Classic’ was left by 
Chang San-Feng from Wudang mountain”, being the legendary founder and 
birthplace of Tàijí. The author goes on to identify the purpose of the art 
as being for students to live long healthy lives, not simply as a method of 
fighting.

 26   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   27
 
4.	
Tàijí Classic (ii) : Wang Ts’ung–Yueh
1.	
Tàijí is born from wújí. It is the mother of yīn and yáng.
2.	
In movement it [yīn and yáng] separates and in stillness it unifies.
3.	
It must not be overdone or fall short.  
Respond to the curve with expansion.
4.	
When the opposition is strong, become supple; this is yielding.  
Follow the person back without disconnection; this is sticking.
5.	
When the movement is fast, respond quickly.  
When the movement is slow, follow slowly.
6.	
Although there are many variations, there is only one principle.
7.	
Proficiency evolves into understanding the forces.  
Understanding precedes spiritual clarity.
8.	
Only through persevered practice will profound understanding be attained.
9.	
Be conscious on the crown of the head. Sink the qì to the dāntián.
10.	 Do not tilt or lean. Suddenly conceal and suddenly reveal.
11.	 When the left is substantial, the left becomes insubstantial  
and when the right is substantial, the right becomes insubstantial.
12.	 When the opponent attacks upwards, I lead him higher  
When the opponent attacks downwards, I draw him lower.  
When he steps forward, I over extend him.  
When he withdraws I close onto him.
山西王宗嶽
太極拳經
1.	
太極者無極而生。陰陽之母也。
2.	
動之則分靜之則合。
3.	
無過不及隨曲就伸。
4.	
人剛我柔謂之走， 
我順人背謂之黏。
5.	
動急則急應， 
動緩則緩隨。
6.	
雖變化萬端，而理為一貫。
7.	
由
熟而漸悟懂勁。 
由懂勁而階及神明。
8.	
然非功力之久，不能豁然貫通焉。
9.	
虛靈頂勁氣沉丹田。
10.	 不偏不倚忽隱忽現。
11.	 左重則左虛，右重則右杳。
12.	 仰之則彌高， 
俯之則彌深。 
進之則愈長， 
退之則愈促。

 28   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   29
13.	 A feather cannot be added. A fly cannot settle. 
14.	 The opponent is not aware of me, but I’m fully aware of him. 
He who has achieved all of this, will be invincible.
15.	 There are a lot of other martial arts, with differences in style and 
movement. However, their basis is the strong overcoming the weak or the 
slow giving way to the fast.
16.	 The strong overcoming the weak and the slow giving way to the fast is 
simply an innate skill and not an achievement of martial art study.
17.	 Considering the verse; “Only four tael are required to neutralise a 
thousand catty of force”, shows that victory is not due to superior 
strength. Observing an old man defeating a mob raises the question; what 
is [the value of] speed?
18.	 Stand like a level scale, be mobile like a wheel.  
Sinking allows you to follow,  double heaviness causes you to be stagnant 
(hindered).
19.	 Someone after years of dedicated practice being unable to adjust or 
neutralise, and is easily defeated by others, has not understood the fault 
of double heaviness.
20.	 To avoid this fault, you must understand the harmony (dynamic 
association) between yīn and yáng. This will lead to dongjìn 
(understanding the forces/energies).
21.	 Once dongjìn is achieved; further practice and analysis develops greater 
refinements. Gradually you will reach the stage where everything extends 
from the will of the mind and xīn (heart).
22.	 The foundation is to forget yourself and follow the other.  
Most mistakenly neglect the near and pursue the far.  
It is said: “To miss by a fraction of a lì is to miss by a thousand lì. 
The student must comprehend all of these points fully,  
so I [Wang Ts’ung – Yueh] say.
13.	 一羽不能加，蠅蟲不能落。 
人不知我，我獨知人。
14.	 英雄所向無敵，蓋皆由此而及也。
15.	 斯技旁門甚多，雖勢有區別。 
概不外乎壯欺弱，慢讓快耳。
16.	 有力打無力，手慢讓手快。 
是皆先天自然之能，非關學力而有為也。
17.	 察四兩撥千斤之句，顯非力勝。 
觀耄耋能禦眾之形，快何能為。
18.	 立如平準，活似車輪。 
偏沉則隨，雙重則滯。
19.	 每見數年純功，不能運化者， 
率自為人制，雙重之病未悟耳。
20.	 欲避此病，須知陰陽相濟，方為懂勁。
21.	 懂勁後，愈練愈精，默識揣摩, 
漸至從心所欲。
22.	 本是舍己從人，多誤舍近求遠。 
所謂差之毫釐，謬以千里。 
學者不可不詳辨焉。是為論。

 30   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   31
Discussion: Wang Ts’ung–Yueh Tàiji Classic
1.	
Wújí is a state of nothingness; no thoughts nor movements. The moment 
a thought enters the mind, wújí ceases to exist. It then changes into the 
state of Tàijí, which comprises of yīn and yáng aspects. Therefore Tàijí is the 
mother of yīn and yáng.
2.	
In movement, yīn and yáng are born and are separate but remain in harmony. 
In stillness they return to the state of wújí
3.	
Movements in the Tàijí form and tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) must not be 
excessive or deficient. This emphasises the importance of accuracy within 
the movements. Overdoing or under-doing movements results in locking 
yourself up or becoming vulnerable to an opponent’s attack. These faults 
cause either the disconnection from, or the obstruction of, the relaxed 
forces. 
	
To counter the opponent’s neutralisation in tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands), cut 
into their curve and expand in a straight line. This response will negate 
their neutralisation and enable you to successfully complete your release 
(bisecting a circle always locates its centre).
Respond to the curve (curve also means to contract or withdraw) with 
expansion means no resistance or disconnection. When the opponent 
curves (contracts) I extend to adhere (stay in connection); and when he 
extends I curve (yielding, with no resistance).
4.	
When the opponent is hard I become supple; that is yielding. Yielding is not 
running away, it is to move into a better (more advantageous) position and 
the timing of it has to be in relation to the incoming force. Yielding must 

 32   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   33
always be accompanied by sinking, so the incoming force can be taken into 
the ground and completely neutralised, otherwise it is merely extended and 
weakened and therefore still on you. Yielding is not defending; defending is 
passive aggression. One must yield to every movement of the opponent, not 
only when they are coming in for a push. By only yielding when an attack is 
imminent it will be too late, just like a chicken trying to struggle free after it 
had been caught by the legs.
To flow with the back of the person, that is adhering. The back of the 
person is referring to the direction of the force from the opponent, not their 
physical back. There is a difference between sticking and adhering. To stick 
is to make contact, and you initiate it. Adhering is to maintain the contact at 
all times both in movement and in position; i.e. when the opponent initiates 
a movement you must follow without losing contact.
5.	
The speed of the movements in tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands) is determined by 
your opponent. To be able to synchronise with the speed, whether fast or 
slow, you must stick, adhere, and follow letting the opponent initiate every 
movement.
6.	
Although there are many different movements, the guiding principle is 
consistent throughout. Although there are tens of thousands of movements 
and changes, there is only one principle in the movements and changes. The 
movements and changes are always relaxed, supple, sinking, connected, 
centred and synchronised.
7.	
When you become skilful, you can reach the state of dŏngjìn (understanding 
the forces). This means you can completely understand the changes in your 
own body’s movement, both in the Tàijí form and pushing-hands, as well as 
the movement of your opponent, and you must be able to experience all 
of the Tàijí principles in your body. Dŏngjìn is evident when the opponent 
does not move; you do not move, and when the opponent has the slightest 
movement; you have already moved ahead. Dŏngjìn later evolves into the 
state of spiritual clarity or Tàijí enlightenment. At this level even when the 
opponent does not move, you move ahead. In this case, although there is 
no apparent physical movement, the opponent has already formed a mental 
intention to move. Recognising this moment is possible once you have 
developed the deep sensitivity to ‘listen’ without depending on physical 
contact.
8.	
Spiritual clarity (Tàijí enlightenment) only comes after many years of 
consistent practice, and Tàijí is a life-long process.
9.	
Being conscious of the crown of the head carries the same meaning as 
visualising the head to be suspended from above. The aim is to keep the 
body erect and upright, and control the centre of equilibrium, thereby 
reducing the likelihood of the chest collapsing (shoulders hunching) when 
relaxing the body. When there is a consciousness at the crown of the head 
one will feel that the spine is being lengthened. The qì sinks into the dāntián 
by using the mind awareness to guide it there, and must not be done 
forcefully. The qì needs to be gathered and stored in the dāntián (the sea of 
qì) before it can be directed to other parts of the body (after the qì is stored 
in the dāntián it is then directed down the legs, through the “bubbling well” 
into the ground. This is the sinking process, and then from the ground it is 
directed back up through the legs and the body to the finger tips, this is the 
process of borrowing the energy from the earth). The ability to sink the qì 
into the dāntián represents entering the first stage of the ‘Earth’ level.
10.	 The body must be upright and level. Any leaning forwards or backwards or 
tilting to one side will result in the posture losing its centre of equilibrium. 
Being level will enable you to have the mobility of a wheel when turning. To 
suddenly reveal and suddenly conceal means you have the ability to change 
between substantiality and insubstantiality at will, and therefore in pushing-
hands your opponents will be unable to predict your changes and will be at 
a loss to respond to you.
11.	 The Tàijí theory of cross-alignment states that the force from the left foot is 
delivered through the right arm, and conversely the force from the right foot 
is delivered through the left arm. Releasing the force from the left foot with 
the left arm or the force from the right foot with the right arm, is regarded 
as a fault of shua¯ngzhòng (equal heaviness). In tuīshŏu (pushing-hands)
when there is a force (substantial) coming onto the left side of your body, 
then the left side of the body must become insubstantial and when there 
is a force (substantial) coming onto the right side of your body then the left 
side must become insubstantial. This is also the meaning of when the left 

 34   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   35
is substantial, the left is insubstantial and when the right is substantial the 
right become insubstantial.
12.	 Over-extending the opponent will disconnect them from their centre and 
root. When the opponent attacks upward; lead them higher than was 
intended, thereby avoiding places for them to utilise. When the opponent 
attacks low, draw them even lower by creating an ‘emptiness’, causing them 
to lose their balance.  When the opponent steps forward, over-stretch them 
to bring them out of their centre. Once the opponent realizes that they are 
out of their centre, they will inevitably withdraw. Because you are sticking 
to and have disconnected their root, they will not have a chance to regain 
themselves.  In short you always yield and neutralize in response to every 
movement of your opponent so that their force never has a place on which 
to settle. This principle reinforces the importance of the earlier principle, 
“When the opponent is hard, I am subtle.”
13.	 After years of practice you can develop such sensitivity that the weight of 
a feather or fly will set you in motion. In tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), as long 
as the opponent force is heavier than a feather or fly you must yield in 
response to it. It is not that you move away from the force, it is the force 
(feather or fly) that sets you in motion and the movement, no matter how 
small it is, must be a whole body synchronisation not a regional movement. 
When the level of dŏngjìn is achieved, you will be constantly aware of your 
opponents’ forces.
14.	 When you are able to conceal your intention, your opponents will not be 
aware of you.
	
When you achieve all of the above, there will be no match for your Tàijí 
skill. However it is no achievement to merely repeat the theory. Rather the 
principles must be evident in your body, with you having acquired the ability 
to apply them practically.
15.	 There are several kinds of other martial arts e.g. Shaolin, Karate Do, Hung Gar 
etc, and even more if you consider the styles within each. What the training 
for most of these systems has in common is the emphasis on strength and/
or speed. Essentially they develop techniques involving stronger forces or 
greater speeds, to overcome their opponents.
16.	 The concepts of the weak being overcome by the strong, and the slow 
giving way to the fast, are not special martial art skills. This is a natural born 
knowledge and is not something that you have train and practice to achieve. 
These are base level instincts, and are utilised in almost every sporting 
arena.
17.	 To understand how the weak can overcome the strong, you have to study the 
principle of four tael dealing with a thousand catty. This principle is expressed 
in the Song of Tuīshŏu. When you observe an old Tàijí adept pushing around 
numerous younger students, you will see the little value of physical speed. 
Because of his tīngjìn (listening) and dŏngjìn (understanding) the adept will 
know the opponents’ intentions before they have even commenced their 
physical movement. Consequently such an adept is always one step ahead. 
This is Tàijí speed. The ordinary people rely on strength (brute force) and 
speed but an old Tàiji practitioner relies on wisdom and skill
18.	 You must be upright and balanced like a level scale to achieve central 
equilibrium. When you have the mobility of a wheel, you cannot get stuck 
and forces will not be able to land on you. In any movement there must also 
be sinking, so any inbound force will be absorbed from the point of contact, 
through the body, the legs and the feet into the ground. There should be 
no resistance and no obstruction in the body, so that when you relax you 
become grounded. You must develop the ability to follow the opponent 
without hindrance. Double heaviness results from opposing force with 
force, and consequently the body tenses up, agility is lost and the grounding 
is undermined causing obstruction and immobility.
19.	 If, after many years of practice, you cannot apply the principles in tuīshŏu 
(pushing-hands) and always get pushed around by your opponents, it is 
because you have not understood the error of double heaviness, and its 
cause. Double heaviness is not about weight distribution, it is about force 
distribution. It is also known as the substantial (yáng) presence of force and 
the insubstantial (yīn) non-presence of force. Substantial and insubstantial 
have no fixed place and time; in the Tàijí form they change with the flow 
of movement and in tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) they change with both the 
opponent’s force and your own response to the force. Meeting force with 
force (yáng and yáng) is a fault in Tàijí called double heaviness and is the 

 36   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   37
greatest fault in Tàijí tuīshŏu (pushing-hands). Meeting yáng with yīn, or 
meeting yīn with yīn are not faults however.
20.	 To overcome the fault of double heaviness, harmonise the yīn and yáng. The 
problem is that in the art of Tàijí, practitioners often make yīn and yáng into 
something mystical whereas “yīn and yáng” is simply a term in the Chinese 
language to describe two opposite things that have a relation to each other, 
for example, right and left, man and woman, day and night, positive and 
negative and substantial and insubstantial. In Tàijí it is referring to substantial 
and insubstantial (force distribution) so that when the opponent is ten per 
cent yáng, you are ten per cent yīn and vice-versa. Therefore whenever 
there is a force (substantial) we must respond with no force (insubstantial), 
and this is the meaning of the harmony of yīn and yáng. To do this you must 
first develop tīngjìn and dŏngjìn; the listening to and the understanding of 
the forces. 
21.	 Even after achieving dŏngjìn (understanding) you must continue to practice, 
analyse and refine your practice to achieve the level of Tàijí enlightenment. 
At this level, the body will naturally follow the will of the mind and heart 
(conscience).
22.	 The foremost principle is to not assert yourself but rather to harmonise with 
your opponent (to follow the other). Leave the initiation of any movement 
to the opponent and do not impose any push on them (your opinion); this 
is the meaning of giving up yourself and following the other. However, one 
thing you must never give up is your central equilibrium. Follow the other 
but do not follow blindly, and when the opponent initiates the movement 
follow until they have committed themselves and you should take over 
the lead. This is also the meaning of first being motivated then becoming 
the motivator. Unfortunately most practitioners ignore the process (the 
near), and instead look for the result (the far). In the Tàijí form the “far” 
represents the external movements and the “near” represents the internal 
changes within the movements. Understanding the changes within the 
movements is the essence of Tàiji. In tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) the “near” 
is your own connection, root, relaxation, sinking and synchronisation of 
your movements in response to the incoming force; and the “far” is your 
opponent’s movements and changes. By focussing within yourself, then 
in your response you are always grounded, connected relaxed and your 
movement is always a whole body synchronisation with continuous sinking. 
Thus the relaxed force will always be present and you can release at will, 
whilst any incoming force is neutralised into the earth. The accuracy of the 
movement and the process is more important. If you depart the origin with 
an error of one millimetre then you could miss the destination by hundreds 
of kilometres (in the Chinese ‘Old System’ of measurement a lì approximates 
to 576 metres).
	
According to Wang T’sung Yueh; all Tàijí practitioners should understand the 
principles fully and clearly.

 38   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   39
十三勢歌
1.	
十三勢來莫輕視。命意源頭在腰際。
2.	
變轉虛實須留意。氣遍身軀不少滯。
3.	
靜中觸動動猶靜。因敵變化示神奇。
4.	
勢勢存心揆用意。得來不覺費功夫。
5.	
刻刻留心在腰間。腹內鬆淨氣騰然。
6.	
尾閭中正神貫頂。滿身輕利頂頭懸。
7.	
仔細留心向推求。屈伸開合聽自由。
8.	
入門引路須口授。功夫無息法自修。
9.	
若言體用何為準。意氣君來骨肉臣。
 
5.	
Tàijí Classic (iii): The Song of the 13 Postures
1.	
Do not take the song of thirteen postures lightly. 
The source of life is in the waist area.
2.	
Attention must be paid to the changes of substantial and insubstantial. 
Let the qì flow freely throughout the body.
3.	
Calmness precedes the motion and while in motion, calmness remains. 
Effectiveness is demonstrated by adapting to the opponent’s changes.
4.	
Using awareness throughout every movement, progress comes naturally.
5.	
Be aware of the waist at all times. 
Relax the abdomen and the qì will come alive.
6.	
Tuck in the tailbone and have consciousness on [raise the shén to] the 
crown of the head. If the head is held as though suspended by the crown,  
the body will be agile.
7.	
Pay careful attention in your practice of pushing-hands. Let the movement 
of expanding and contracting, opening and closing be natural.
8.	
To be shown the route to the [Tàijí] door you need oral transmission.  
Through continuous practice and self analysis comes the [Tàijí] method.
9.	
If asked the principle of the understanding and its application, answer; the 
yì (mind intention) and the qì are the kings, while the flesh and bones are 
their subjects.

 40   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   41
10.	 想推用意終何在。益壽延年不老春。
11.	 歌兮歌兮百四十。字字真切意無遺。
12.	 若不向此推求去。枉費功夫貽歎息。
10.	 What is the goal of understanding and its application? 
To keep healthy, and have a long life.
11.	 This song, this song of one hundred and forty words. 
Every word contains the truth and whole meaning.
12.	 If you do not adhere to the above,  
your effort will be in vain and only a sigh will result.

 42   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   43
Discussion on: The Song of the Thirteen Postures
1.	
These principles must be taken seriously and practiced diligently. The waist 
area is where the kidneys are located and in traditional Chinese medicine it 
is believed that the prenatal life force, inherited from your parents, is stored 
there. In Tàijí, the kuà (hips) and the yaō (waist) are the source of upper 
body mobility. When turning in either the Tàijí form or tuīshŏu (pushing-
hands), the turn must be initiated from the hips and waist, in connection 
with the changes in the base (legs).
2.	
You must always be aware of your own, and your opponent’s, expressions 
of substantiality and insubstantiality. According to the theory of cross-
alignment, when the right foot is substantial the left arm is substantial, 
and vice-versa. Similarly, when your opponent is substantial, you should be 
insubstantial. If your right arm and right foot are substantial at the same 
time, or you are substantial when your opponent is also substantial, then 
there is the error of shuangzhúng (equal heaviness - often mistranslated as 
‘double weighted’). This will severely hinder your movements and obstruct 
the flow of qì. One must remember that ‘substantial’ and ‘insubstantial’ 
have no fixed place or time, and they continually change with movement 
and according to the situation. Therefore, in pushing-hands one must be 
very sensitive to adjust one’s substantiality and insubstantiality according 
to the changes of the opponent, in order to avoid committing the fault of 
double heaviness. When you can understand the changes between what 
is substantial and what is insubstantial, the qì will be able to flow freely 
throughout the body, directed by the mind.

 44   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   45
	
In pushing hands the upper body should be yīn (insubstantial) and the base 
should be yáng (substantial). Every adjustment is initiated from the base, 
with the body and the arms just following. However, these changes must 
only be in response to your opponent, and not self-motivated. There are no 
fixed places or times (where or when) for the changes, it always depends on 
the situation.
3.	
The mind should be calm to motivate the qì, which in turn motivates the 
physical movement. During movement the mind should not drift off, it 
should be continually present within the movement. When the mind is 
calm throughout the Tàijí form, you can understand the changes that create 
every movement, and you can be aware of any tension in the body. During 
tuīshŏu (pushing hands), the calm mind provides you with the opportunity 
to ‘hear’ your opponents every move, and understand your reaction to it.
	
If you are able to adapt to the opponent’s changes, their force will have 
nowhere to land. To be able to adapt to the changes of the opponent, you 
must be able to understand the principles of, and listen to, the changes 
between yīn (insubstantial) and yáng (substantial), while sticking, adhering, 
not resisting and not disconnecting.
	
When responding to the opponent you should not make any unnecessary 
movements, and the mind must remain calm.
4.	
Correct practice will produce natural progress. Correct practice includes 
having awareness of: the movement; the sequence that creates the 
movement; the timing of the changes; the connection; the centre of 
equilibrium while moving; and the relaxation and sinking within the 
movement. One must continually experience the Tàijí principles in every 
movement.
5.	
The hips (kuà) and waist control the direction of the upper body and 
therefore any change in the direction of the upper body must originate from 
the waist. If the abdomen is relaxed then the qì will naturally sink and gather 
in the dāntián, from where it can be directed to every part of the body.
6.	
When the tailbone is tucked under and the consciousness is on the crown 
of the head, the níwán (baihui) and the huìyīn are aligned and the central 
axis within the body is established. Whilst the centre of equilibrium is 
maintained, visualising the head to be suspended from above decreases the 
likelihood of collapsing the chest or hunching the back. When the centre of 
equilibrium is maintained the body is centred, balanced, and therefore agile 
when moving. Central equilibrium is not only one of the original thirteen Tàijí 
postures, it is the foundation of all of them. Therefore central equilibrium 
must also be included in the other twelve postures, since without it you 
cannot really experience the subtle changes and deep relaxation.
	
The second part of this principle says “the whole body will be light and agile 
if the head is suspended from above”. This has the same meaning as “raising 
your spirit” in the classic ‘The Understanding Of The Thirteen Postures’. 
There is a Chinese saying that if your head is bowed down (flopped), your 
qì will disperse. For the central equilibrium to exist the required physical 
structure includes being upright, a straight spine with the tailbone tucked 
under, and the kuà (hips joints) kept level. Both in the Tàijí form and during 
tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) the upper body should feel as if suspended lightly 
from above and the base sunken and firmly grounded.
7.	
To cultivate tīngjìn (listening) and dŏngjìn (understanding) of the forces; 
pay close attention to the practice of tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), developing 
sticking, adhering, and following, while not disconnecting or resisting. When 
the listening and understanding have been achieved, the body will expand 
and contract, opening and closing naturally, without premeditation.
8.	
Beginners in Tàijí require a knowledgeable teacher to impart the Tàijí 
knowledge to them. Books and videos can only serve as references, and 
cannot actually teach you Tàijí. Progress only comes from practice and 
self-analysis. Learning without practising, is like eating without digesting. 
The teacher can show the way, but cannot directly pass on the skill; the 
students must walk the way (practice) themselves and their practice will 
enable them to develop the skill. Furthermore, the students must not learn 
and practise blindly. They must analyse both what has been taught and their 
own practice, whilst continually referring to the Tàijí classics to see if what 
they learn, and their practice, are in line with the principles. This is why 
even if a teacher is good it is not necessarily the case that all the students 
are good; or, when a father is good, that all of his children are good.

 46   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   47
	
Remember that even the teacher is also a student, and his/her own 
understanding is evolving and changing, and may have errors. So if you 
follow blindly without analysing you may spend a lifetime practicing the 
wrong thing.
9.	
Question: What is the main principle of the understanding and application? 
Answer: The subject / body (flesh and bone) must follow the commands of 
the king - yì (mind intention) and qì. In every movement, the mind motivates 
the qì, and the qì motivates the body. In the practice of Tàijí, you do not 
go to the forms to look for the Tàijí principles. You read and understand 
the principles and when you practice you must put the principles into the 
movements. Whichever principle the mind (yì) is aware of at any moment 
or in any movement, the body must respond to the principle. After 
prolonged practice the principles are naturally absorbed into the body and 
its movements.
10.	 The main aim of understanding and applying the Tàijí principles is to cultivate 
a healthy and long life.
11.	 In the original Chinese text the ‘song’ has twenty verses each with seven 
words, making a total of one hundred and forty words. The meaning of 
every word is clear and important. 
12.	 If you do not follow the principles contained in this ‘song’ and do not base 
your practice on them, then your efforts will not achieve anything.

 48   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   49
十三勢行功心解
 
1.	
以心行氣。 
務令沉。 
乃能收斂入骨。
2.	
以氣運身。 
務令順遂。 
乃能便利從心。
3.	
精神能提得起。 
則無遲重之虞。 
所謂頂頭懸也。
4.	
意氣須換得靈。 
乃有圓活之趣。 
所謂轉變虛實也。
5.	
發勁須沉鬆淨。 
專主一方。
6.	
立身須中正安舒。 
支撐八面。
7.	
行氣如九曲珠。 
無往不利。 
（氣遍身軀之謂）運勁如百煉鋼，無堅不摧。
 
6.	
Tàijí Classic (iv):  	The Understanding of the 	 	
	
	
	
	
Thirteen Postures
1.	
The xīn (mind/conscious mind, awareness) motivates the qì and directs it 
to sink, so that it can be stored and concentrated into the bones.
2.	
Let the qì motivate the body without hindrance, so that it will effortlessly 
follow your xīn (mind/conscious mind).
3.	
If the shén (spirit) is raised, there will not be any sluggishness. This is the 
meaning of the crown of the head being suspended from above.
4.	
There should be agility in the interaction of the yì (mind intention) and 
qì, so that it [the qì] will be circular and lively. This is what is meant by 
‘changing substantial and insubstantial’.
5.	
When executing fājìn (releasing the relaxed force) the body should sink 
and completely relax. Focus on the one direction.
6.	
When the body is upright, loose and tranquil, the feet will support all eight 
directions.
7.	
Direct the qì like threading the ‘nine bend pearls’; 
by flowing continuously it reaches everywhere unrestricted.
	
[When the qì flows throughout the body] the jìn (relaxed force) is like 
tempered steel, overcoming all solid defences.

 50   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   51
8.	
形如搏兔之鶻。 
神如捕鼠之貓。
9.	
靜如山岳。 
動如江河。
10.	 蓄勁如張弓。 
發勁如放箭。
11.	 曲中求直。 
蓄而後發。
12.	 力由脊發。 
步隨身換。
13.	 收即是放，斷而復連。
14.	 往復須有摺疊。 
進退須有轉換。
15.	 極柔軟。 
然後極堅剛。
16.	 能呼吸。 
然後能靈活。
17.	 氣以直養而無害。 
勁以曲蓄而有餘。
18.	 心為令。 
氣為旗。 
腰為纛。
19.	 先求開展。 
後求緊湊。 
乃可臻於縝密矣。
20.	 又曰：「彼不動，己不動。 
彼微動，己先動。」
21.	 勁似鬆非鬆，將展未展。 
勁斷意不斷。
22.	 又曰：「先在心，後在身。」
8.	
Have the appearance of a falcon preying on a hare.  
Concentrate the shén (spirit) like a cat stalking a mouse.
9.	
Be calm like a mountain and move like a river.
10.	 Store up the jìn (relaxed force) like drawing a bow,  
discharge the jìn (relaxed force) like releasing an arrow.
11.	 Seek the straight in the curve,  
first store then discharge.
12.	 Force is released through the back,  
the steps change with the body.
13.	 To receive is to release, if it disconnects then reconnect.
14.	 In moving forwards and backwards, there should be folding.  
In advancing and retreating, there should be changes of direction.
15.	 Extreme softness yields to extreme firmness and tenacity.
16.	 Only with the ability to inhale and exhale, will there be agility.
17.	 When qì is cultivated naturally, there is no harm.  
When the jìn (relaxed force) is stored, there will be a surplus.
18.	 The xīn (mind/conscious mind) is the commander, the qì is the flag and the 
yāo (hips and waist) is the banner.
19.	 First seek expansion while opening then seek contraction while closing.  
It will lead to perfect refinement.
20.	 It is said; “If the other does not move, I do not move.  
If the other has the slightest movement, I move ahead”.
21.	 The jìn (force) seems sōng (relaxed), however it is not sōng (relaxed),  
it is about to expand, although it has not yet expanded.  
The jìn (relaxed force) might disconnect, but the mind must not.
22.	 It is also said: “First the xīn (mind/conscious mind), then the body”.

 52   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   53
23.	 腹鬆氣沉入骨。 
神舒體靜。
24.	 刻刻在心。 
切記：一動無有不動， 
一靜無有不靜。
25.	 牽動往來，氣貼背而斂入脊骨。
26.	 內固精神。 
外示安逸
27.	 邁步如貓行。 
運勁如抽絲。
28.	 全身意在精神，不在氣；在氣則滯。 
有氣則無力。 
無氣則純剛。 
氣若車輪，腰如車軸。
23.	 When the abdomen relaxes, the qì sinks into the bones.  
When the shén (spirit) calms, the body becomes tranquil. 
24.	 Keep this in xīn (in your heart).  
Remember; when you move, every part moves.  
When you settle, every part settles.
25.	 When moving forwards and backwards, 
 the qì sticks to the back and permeates into the spine.
26.	 Internally be acutely aware of the shén (spirit),  
externally appear calm and relaxed.
27.	 Step like a cat.  
Transmit the jìn (force) like reeling silk from a cocoon.
28.	 The yì (intention) should be on the jìngshén (spirit), not on the qì,  
on the qì will stagnate.  
With the qì there will be no strength. Without qì it is like tempered steel.  
Qì is like the cart wheel and the yaō (waist) is like the axle.

 54   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   55
Discussion on: The Understanding of the 13 Postures
1.	
The flow of qì is directed by the mind awareness (yì), which is itself divided 
into two parts. First there is the mind intention, which is the planning stage, 
and then there is the mind awareness which is when the process is taking 
place. Intention without awareness is a “dead mind”. The yì must first be sent 
into the dāntián, then to the limbs and finally through the huìyīn meridian 
point to the three gates the wěilü, yùzhěn and níwán. This enables the qì to 
be absorbed into the bones.
2.	
If the body has its centre of equilibrium, is relaxed and connected and the 
mind is calm, then the qì will be able to flow unhindered throughout the 
body. When the qì can flow unrestricted, it can be directed by the will of the 
mind.
3.	
When the shén (spirit) is raised and the huìyīn and níwán meridian points 
are in line, the centre of equilibrium is attained. The body will therefore be 
upright, centred, balanced and not sluggish. This is what is meant by the 
principle of visualising the head to be suspended from above.
4.	
When the movement is initiated by the mind leading the qì, the mind and 
qì (the qì here refers to breathing, which should be natural and relaxed, 
not heavy breathing or panting) interact with agility. The body is therefore 
able to move without hindrance, providing that the central equilibrium 
is maintained, the body is centred and grounded as well as left/right and 
up/down, being in balance. Then the flow of qì will naturally be circular 
and lively. This is also the meaning of, ‘changing the substantiality and 
insubstantiality’.

 56   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   57
5.	
When executing fājìn (releasing the relaxed force), the body must be relaxed. 
Any excess tension in the body will reduce the percentage of grounding, 
and undermine the root. Tension will also lessen the connection of the 
arms to the body, the body to the base, and the base/feet to the ground. 
If jìn (relaxed force) is stored for release but the body is tense, up to 50% 
will be consumed by your own muscles, leaving a maximum of a half to 
be transmitted into the opponent. Complete relaxation is the only way to 
release the entire force, unrestricted.
	
Sinking is a mental process in which the mind directs the qì downwards 
through the body into the feet into the ground, creating a root, which is 
used to “borrow the energy from the earth”. Therefore if the body relaxes 
and sinks, compression develops which produces the spring-like jìn (relaxed 
force). When this jìn is released the mind should focus on the direction and 
project as far as possible beyond the opponent.
6.	
While the body is upright, the centre of equilibrium can be attained. When 
the body is loose, it is relaxed and free of tension. When the mind is tranquil, 
it can harmonise with the body. Then by being upright, loose and tranquil 
together, the upper body can become light and the base heavy (grounded), 
therefore able to support the body in all eight directions (the four cardinals 
plus the four diagonals).
7. 	
The original Chinese text translates as “direct the qì like threading the nine 
bend pearls”. However it should not be taken literally, the term threading 
the nine bend pearls refers to flowing continuously. When the qì flows 
continuously, it reaches everywhere smoothly. When the body is centred, 
relaxed and connected, the mind will be able to direct the qì into the dāntián 
continuously, and from the dāntián into the feet, from which it rebounds 
into the fingers. 
	
When the qì is able to flow smoothly and continuously throughout the 
body, from the huìyīn to the níwán (crown of the head), the relaxed force 
produced is as pure and powerful as tempered steel. When discharged 
nothing will be able to withstand it.
8.	
When an eagle is preying on a hare it circles with sharp eyes, alert for any 
movement. When a cat stalks a mouse it is calm, relaxed and focussed; only 
pouncing when the time is right. Similarly in tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), be 
sensitive at all times, and seize on every opportunity the moment it arises. 
The eagle represents staying aware for a chance to attack, while the cat 
signifies recognising the correct timing and direction. Avoid pushing blindly, 
when there is no opportunity to warrant it. A poorly timed or wrongly 
directed attack will certainly miss.
9.	
When not moving one should be as calm, still, grounded and sturdy as a 
mountain. When moving one should be flowing, soft and powerful as a river 
washing away everything in its path.
10.	 Before an arrow can be released, the string of the bow must be drawn to 
create the elastic force, and a spring must be compressed before it can 
produce a rebounding force. Similarly, before the body’s jìn (relaxed force) 
is released, it is necessary to sink and load up. When releasing an arrow 
from a bow there should not be any hesitation and the focus should not be 
at the arrow head but on the target, the same applies to fājìn (releasing of 
the force). When releasing, one should not hesitate, because hesitation will 
reduce the power released. When the relaxed force is released the focus 
should not be on the hand or at the point of contact, but a point beyond the 
opponent, as far as the mind can focus.
11.	 The curve refers to neutralising, and the straight represents issuing. Seeking 
the straight in the curve means finding the opportunity to issue while 
neutralising the incoming force. By issuing during the neutralisation, you 
draw your opponent into an emptiness thereby uprooting him. Issuing 
without first neutralising results in force against force and means you are 
imposing or pushing against your opponent.
	
The yielding and neutralising movements are circular. When attacking, if 
you can establish a line from your feet through the point of contact into 
the opponent’s substantial foot, you can bisect the opponent’s circle, and 
render their neutralisation ineffective. 
	
Neutralising in curves is yīn, attacking in straight lines is yáng. Therefore 
by neutralising without attacking, it is yīn without yáng, and usually results 
in being forced into a corner and still being pushed over. Continuing to 
attack in the one direction without turning, is yáng without yīn, and most 

 58   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   59
often results in being over-extended and easily rolled-back or plucked out. 
Therefore in straight there should be a curve and vice versa, then yīn and 
yáng will be in harmony. Sink to build up the energy, storing it before it is 
released.
12.	 When executing fājìn (releasing the relaxed force), the jìn (relaxed force) is 
transmitted through the back. During the process of releasing the tail bone 
tucks under to provide space for the back muscles to relax, the shoulder 
blades drop downward, and the shoulders sink. The footwork must follow 
the changes of the body movements.
13.	 To receive is to accept an incoming force without any resistance, allowing it 
to pass through the body into the ground, thereby completely neutralising 
it. It is not simply a sequence of entirely neutralising the incoming force then 
releasing your own; yīn and yáng must always be in harmony. This means 
that if there is ten percent of neutralising, then ten percent of force should 
be already returning to the attacker. This is very clearly demonstrated at the 
stage of jièjìn (receiving force). Whenever there is disconnection, connection 
must be restored immediately.
14.	 When moving forwards or backwards the technique of folding should be 
used. So that, for example, if the palm is neutralised then the forearm 
follows in, by folding at the wrist. Similarly if the forearm is neutralised 
then the elbow folds for the upper arm to follow in, and if the upper arm is 
neutralised, the shoulder folds for the body to follow in; this is the external 
folding. This is also what is meant by the statement “the hands are not [the 
only] hands, the whole body is the hands”. Internal folding is before the 
first wave of relaxed force is completely issued the second wave follows, 
and before the second wave is complete the third wave follows, thereby 
creating continuous waves of relaxed force, giving the opponent no chance 
to recover. This is like being swept off one’s feet by the undercurrent in the 
river and there is no chance to recover as the current is continuous without 
any break. When advancing or retreating there must always be a change in 
direction to avoid moving in a straight line or only turning in one direction 
.Any movement in one direction will eventually reach a dead end. Therefore 
any movement should be circular and, halfway through the first circle, one 
must change into the next circle in a different direction. It is a continuous 
change of circular movements giving the opponent no chance of settling in 
the movement. The changes of direction are not fixed; they could be up or 
down, horizontal or vertical or diagonal, left of right circular movements. As 
with all movements in Tàijí, the circular movement should be initiated by 
the synchronisation of the base, hips, waist, body and arms.
16.	 Breathing naturally without holding the breath or panting, enables the body 
to relax and become agile.
17.	 When qì is cultivated and circulated, it results in good health, benefiting 
not harming the body. By storing the jìn (relaxed force) it becomes readily 
available. Continuously relaxing, sinking, and connecting, provides an on-
going supply of jìn (relaxed force). In Tàijí, when such a force is constantly 
present in the body, it is termed péngjìn. 
18.	 The xīn here refers to the mind intention (commander), the qì is the mind 
awareness (flag), the yāo (hips and waist) are the direction (banner). 
19.	 First seek expansion (big, open movements) then seek contraction (small, 
compact movements). When initially practicing the Tàijí form and tuīshŏu 
(pushing-hands) pay attention to the external principles like being upright 
and level (maintaining central equilibrium) Using the kuà and waist to turn, 
relax and sit the hips, relax and sink the shoulders and drop the elbows 
and loosen the joint and muscles. This is seeking the expansion (big, open 
movements).
	
Then when you start to refine the Tàijí form and tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), 
you should be listening to the sequence of changes within each movement, 
changing the different parts in relation to each other. Listen to the adjustment 
of every muscle during transition, and listen to the relaxation, sinking and 
the release of forces taking place in the changes. This is contraction (compact 
movements).
	
In the beginning your movements should be practiced big and expansive to 
open the joints and stretch the ligaments. With progression the timing refines 
and the posture sequences connect. These refinements naturally result in 
the movements becoming smaller more compact, and synchronised.

 60   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   61
20.	 The movements of tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) should be initiated by your 
opponent. Therefore if your partner does not move, you do not move. By 
synchronising with his or her slightest movement and remaining connected, 
you can lead them into over committing themselves. This is what is meant 
by “moving ahead”, and is a clear example of dŏngjìn (understanding of the 
forces).
21.	 The jìn (relaxed force) is neither hard nor soft, but rather it is firm and springy. 
Every expansion also requires contraction, and in the fājìn (releasing of the 
force) there must be sinking.
	
After discharging your opponent, your jìn disconnects but your mind’s focus 
should continue to project in the same direction. 
22.	 If the xīn (mind/conscious mind) is made king and the body the subject, 
the mind can command and the body will follow. Not only in Tàijí, but as 
with anything in life the mind decides what to do and the body follows. For 
example, when the mind decides to have a cup of coffee, then we make the 
coffee and drink it. It is certainly not after drinking the coffee that the mind 
decides that we want to have a cup of coffee. Therefore the mind makes the 
decision and the body carries out the decision of the mind.
23.	 When the abdomen is relaxed the qì will sink into the dāntián. From the 
dāntián it flows throughout the huìyīn into the three gates and absorbed 
into the bones, increasing the density of the bone marrow. 
	
When the shén (spirit) is calm and in harmony with the mind, the body will 
be relaxed.
24.	 To begin any posture, every part of the body connects and changes in relation 
to each other to create the movement. To complete a posture every part of 
the body synchronises, so that even though they have different destinations, 
their time of arrival will be the same. In tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) when 
your opponent’s force is on you, it is the whole body that adjusts, not just 
the area immediately around the contact points. In Tàijí even the slightest 
movement is a whole body synchronisation not a regional movement. It 
is so important in this part of the Tàijí classics that it not only asks you to 
remember this principle but it asks you to keep it in your heart at all times.
25.	 When the qì is able to pass through the huìyīn meridian point to the níwán 
(crown of the head) meridian point, it indicates being in the third stage of 
the Earth level. At this point, when the qì travels through the three gates it 
will permeate into the spine and other bones.
26.	 Internally the mind and shén (spirit) must be calm, and externally there 
must not be any tension, so the qì can flow unhindered.
27.	 The footwork should be soft and balanced yet stable and grounded, just 
like a cat walking. During releasing, the jìn (relaxed force) should be one 
continuous flow, from the feet through the legs, hips, body, arms and fingers, 
without any pause or break. When silk is reeled off a cocoon it should be as 
a long, continuous thin thread of silk, because once it is broken it is of no 
use.
28.	 It is important to understand that in the Chinese language the same character 
can have a different meaning if placed in a different part of a sentence. The 
whole awareness should be in the mind not on the qì, and here the qì is 
referring to brute force. When using brute force it will stagnate because in 
a short time one will get out of breath and thereby lose agility. When there 
is qì (brute force) there will be no lí, and here the lí mean stamina because 
if you use brute force you will tire easily and lose your strength. When there 
is no qì (brute force) then you are relaxed and will be able to develop the 
relaxed force, which is like tempered steel.
Qì is like the cart wheel (here the qì is referring to the relaxed force) with the 
yaō (hips and the waist) being like the axle.
The axle moves the cart wheel, so the hips and the waist create the direction 
of the relax force.

 62   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   63
打手歌
1.	
掤
擠按須認真。
2.	
上下相隨人難進。
3.	
任他巨力來打吾。
4.	
牽動四兩撥千斤。
5.	
引進落空合即出。
6.	
黏連貼隨不丟頂。
 
7.	
Tàijí Classic (v): The Song of Tuīshŏu
1.	
Be diligent about péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back),  
jĭ (press) and àn (push). 
2.	
[If] Upper and lower are synchronised,  
it will be difficult for the other to come in.
3.	
Let him use immense lí (brute strength) to hit me. 
4.	
Lead his movements with only four tael (approx. 15 grams) to neutralise a 
thousand catty (approx. 240 grams) of force. 
5.	
Draw him into emptiness, join, gather [the force] then send it out. 
6.	
Nián (adhere), lián (connect), tiē (stick), [and] suí (follow),  
without disconnecting or resisting. 

 64   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   65
Discussion on: The Song of Tuīshŏu
1.	
To be diligent is to not take it lightly; it is to study carefully and seriously. 
In the Tàijí form péng (ward off), lü (roll back), jĭ (press) and àn (push) are 
collectively known as Grasp the sparrow’s tail. Grasp the sparrow’s tail, 
according to Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan, is “the meat of the Tàijí form”; 
in other words it is the most important part of the form. There is a saying, 
that if you understand the Grasp the sparrow’s tail you will understand the 
whole Tàijí form. Therefore, when practising this part of the form, attention 
should be paid to the accuracy of the movements and on putting the Tàijí 
principles into them, whilst understanding and remembering the changes 
and experiences in the movement. Whatever happens and whatever 
you experience in Grasp the sparrow’s tail will also arise in all the other 
movements of the form, as well as in tuīshŏu (pushing-hands). Péng (ward-
off), lǔ (roll-back),  jĭ (press) and àn (push) are the four cardinal directions 
in tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), and attention must be paid to the accuracy of 
practising them. You should recognise when to àn (push); when to lǔ (roll-
back); when to jĭ (press); and when to péng (ward-off). When using lǔ, you 
should not roll-back on to your own body. When using péng, you should 
not ward-off onto the opponent’s body. When pushing (àn), or pressing (jĭ), 
you should first store the energy (absorb or sink) before releasing it. It is 
important to pay attention to the timing of yielding and neutralising. 
2.	
The upper and lower body must be connected, centred and properly aligned. 
All parts of the body are synchronised and therefore move in relation to 
one another, thus making it difficult for an opponent to find a gap to enter 

 66   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   67
and attack. Even the slightest movement in response to any force or change 
must be a whole-body synchronisation and not a ‘regional movement’.
3.	
Let the opponent expend all his force and effort attacking. This emphasises 
the futility of using brute force and the confidence of a genuine Tàijí 
practitioner in the handling of brute force. Teacher Huang used to say that 
“I am not afraid of my opponent having great strength or brute force, I am 
only afraid if he or she is more relaxed then me”.
4.	
This sentence describes the fundamental principle of Tàijí in application as a 
martial art. Even if the opponent attacks with a lot of strength (one thousand 
catty), by following the direction and the momentum without resisting, the 
attack has nothing to land on and, using their momentum, it only requires a 
very small amount (four tael) of force to deflect and neutralise the attack.
	
Note: Tael and catty are ancient Chinese units to measure weight. 16 taels 
equal one catty (one tael is equals approximately 15 grams), and one catty 
equals approximately 240 grams).
5.	
While the above sentence describes the principles of application of Tàijí as a 
martial art, this sentence explains the method to apply the principle. There 
is a significant difference between drawing into emptiness and merely 
extending the force. Extending the force will weaken it, but there will still 
be force on you, whilst your opponent is still connected and will have the 
space and time to readjust. Drawing into emptiness is to let the opponent 
fall into a void, where they are completely uprooted and have no time or 
space to readjust. To be able to draw an opponent into emptiness one must 
have the ability to readily accept and receive an incoming force. If you resist 
or hold out against any pushes or force, you cannot draw the opponent 
into emptiness and you will give him a structure to use. Therefore, the 
foundation of a Tàijí push is to yield and accept any incoming force, not to 
push.
6.	
You should be like a sponge, which goes in as much as it is pushed and comes 
back as much as the withdrawal. When you can tiē (stick), lián (connect), 
nián (adhere) and suí (follow), without disconnecting or resisting, you will 
be able to follow any changes that the opponent makes. Practising all these 
qualities develops tīngjìn (listening energy), dŏngjìn (understanding energy) 
and ultimately shénmíng (spiritual clarity / enlightenment). The external 
representations of the five elements are centre (earth), forward (fire), 
backward (water), left (wood) and right (metal). The internal representations 
of the five elements are sticking (making the first contact), adhering (without 
losing contact), following (going with the flow), disconnecting (losing 
contact), and resisting (going against the flow).

 68   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   69
體用歌
1.	
太極拳，十三式。 
妙在二氣分陰陽。
2.	
化生千億歸抱一。 
歸抱一，太極拳。
3.	
兩儀四象渾無邊， 
禦風何似頂頭懸。
4.	
我有一轉語，今為知者吐： 
「湧泉無根腰無主，力學垂死終無補。」
5.	
體用相兼豈有他。 
浩然氣能行乎手。
6.	
掤
擠按採列肘靠進退顧盼定。
7.	
不化自化走自走。 
足欲向前先挫後。
8.	
身似行雲，打手安用手。 
渾身是手手非手。
9.	
但須方寸隨時守所守。
 
8.	
Tàijí Classic (vi):  	The Song of Substance and 	 	
	
	
	
	
Function  - Cheng Man-Ching
1.	
Tàijíquán, - the thirteen postures.  
The marvel lies in the nature of qì, yīn and yáng.
2.	
It changes into infinity and returns to the one.  
Returns to the one; Tàijíquán.
3.	
The two primary principles (yīn and yáng)  
and four manifestations are without boundary.
	
To ride the wind, the head is suspended at the crown, from above.
4.	
I have words for those who can understand:  
“If the yŏngquán (bubbling well) has no root, or the yāo (waist) has no 
control, life-long practice will be in vain”.
5.	
The training of substance and function need it (the above principle).
The Hou Ran qì (energy) must be able to flow to the fingers.
6.	
Always remain in central equilibrium during péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back),  
jĭ  (press), àn (push), căi (pluck), liè (split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào  
(lean-on), and also when stepping forward, sitting backward, looking left, 
looking right, and staying centred.
7.	
Neutralising without neutralising, yielding without yielding.  
If you want to move the foot forward, you have to first sit back.
8.	
The body is like floating cloud, in the pushing-hands why use the hands? 
The whole body functions as the hands, the hands are not the [only] hands.
9.	
There should be awareness and defending of every square inch at all times.

 70   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   71
Discussion on: The Song of Substance and Function
1.	
Tàijíquán consists of the original thirteen postures: Péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-
back), jĭ (press), and àn (push) as the four cardinal directions, căi (pluck), liè 
(split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on) being the four oblique angles. 
Plus the five elements of stepping forward, sitting back, looking left, looking 
right and staying centred. The amazing thing about Tàijíquán is that it is 
never ending, constantly interacting, changing between yīn and yáng.
2.	
It is capable of an endless number of changes and yet able to harmonise 
and unify into one, that is Tàijíquán (yīn and yáng).
3.	
The changes of yīn and yáng and four manifestations are not limited by 
space or time.
	
Riding the wind means to be able to adapt to unpredictable changes in 
the situation and the force. To be able to ride the wind you must have an 
aligned centre of equilibrium. When the head is held as though the crown 
is suspended from the above the níwán and huìyīn meridian points will 
be vertically in line, the body will be upright, and therefore the centre of 
equilibrium will be achieved.
4.	
The author has words of advice for practitioners wanting to understand 
Tàijíquán: The yŏngquán (bubbling well) is a meridian point under both feet 
and serves as the root of the body’s posture. It is through these, that both 
an incoming force is emptied into the earth, and the energy from the earth 
is passed from the ground into the body. When the yŏngquán (bubbling 
well) in the feet is not connected to the ground, the body is without root 
and any incoming force will only remain in the body. The result is double 

 72   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   73
heaviness, which hinders the body movement causing inflexibility. The loss 
of mobility in the hips means that the waist will be unable to control the 
direction of release. Under these circumstances, even after a lifetime of 
dedicated practice, no significant benefits will result.
5.	
In the substance [Tàijí form], the body and the function [pushing-hands] 
one must understand the above principle. If the yŏngquán (bubbling well) 
has no root then you are not connected and have no stability. Therefore one 
will be unable to change in movement or to swallow the qì of the heaven 
and borrow the qì from the earth.
Hou Ran qì (righteousness energy) will be present in the body if you are 
relaxed, connected, centered and grounded (root in the bubbling well) and 
able to direct it at will to the fingers tips, as stated in the no.7 principle in the 
classic “The Understanding of the Thirteen Postures”. To my understanding 
this energy is also known as péng force.
6.	
Establishing the centre of equilibrium is the function of the thirteen postures. 
In the postures of péng (ward-off), lǔ (roll-back), jĭ (press), àn (push), căi 
(pluck), liè (split), zhŏu (elbow-strike) and kào (lean-on), and also when 
stepping forward, sitting backward, looking left, looking right, and staying 
centred, the centre of equilibrium must be maintained.
7.	
Being able to neutralise without neutralising, and yield without yielding is 
termed jièjìn (receiving a force). When a Tàijí practitioner reaches this high 
level he or she can change without apparently changing, and act without 
any apparent action, allowing the incoming force to pass through the body 
(the body become an empty void) into the ground and rebound back up 
(action-reaction theory) sending the person off a great distance. This is 
when yielding, neutralising and issuing became one.
	
Before moving forward, you should sit back and sink into the rear foot 
to connect with the root, and if required to free the front foot to step 
forward.
8.	
We can all see clouds and yet an aircraft passes through them without 
obstruction. Clouds constantly change in response to the wind or atmospheric 
pressure. Similarly in Tàijí the body is ever changing in response to incoming 
forces. In simple terms the upper body is yīn and the lower body is yáng 
with all adjustments beginning in the base. No force can land on the upper 
body if it constantly changes in relation to the adjustment of the base.
	
Why use the hands in pushing-hands? The only functions of the hands 
should be to stick and listen, not to push with. There actually isn’t any 
need to push at all in Tàijí, just issue or release the relaxed force. The force 
itself originates in the feet and develops in the legs, and therefore it can 
be expressed through any part of the body in contact with the opponent. 
Hence the hands are not the [only] hands; all parts of the body are hands. 
This is the meaning of folding.
9.	
Mind awareness must be present in every part of the body and every 
movement at all times. Every part of the body and every movement should 
be defended or guarded, leaving no gap or opportunity for others to take.

 74   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   75
楊家太極拳要領
	
楊澄莆口授
1.	
虛靈頂勁。
2.	
含胸拔背。
3.	
鬆腰。
4.	
分虛實。
5.	
沉肩墜肘。
6.	
用意不用力。
7.	
上下相隨。
8.	
內外相合。
9.	
相連不斷。
10.	 動中求靜。
11.	 似拉鋸式。
12.	 我不是肉架子。
13.	 磨轉心不轉。
14.	 撥不倒，不倒翁。
 
9.	
Tàijí Classic (vii):  Important Tàijí points 	
	
	
 from the Yang Family — Yang Cheng-Fu
1.	
Raise the shén (spirit) to the crown of the head.
2.	
Hán (contain - not reveal) the chest and bá (spread) the back.
3.	
Sōng (relax) the yaō (waist).
4.	
Differentiate shí (substantial) from xu¯ (insubstantial).
5.	
Chén (sink) the shoulders and hang [drop] the elbows
6.	
Use yì (mind intention) not lì (brute strength).
7.	
Upper and lower body synchronise.
8.	
Internal and external are in harmony.
9.	
Be connected, without discontinuity.
10.	 Seek calmness in movement.
11.	 [Be like] two men sawing.
12.	 I’m not a meat rack.
13.	 The millstone turns but the axle does not [turn].
14.	 Be an upright doll that cannot be pushed over.

 76   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   77
Discussion on: 	
Important Tàijí points from the  
	
	
	
Yang family  
1.	
Raising the shén (spirit) to the crown of the head is the same concept 
as holding the head as though being suspended from above, and being 
conscious of the crown of the head. One should feel as if the spine is 
lengthened. When I began training directly under Huang Sheng-Shyan, he 
occasionally placed an empty matchbox on my head while I practiced, which 
assisted me to maintain an awareness of the crown of my head throughout 
the form. Subsequently the body became upright with the níwán and the 
huìyīn meridian points aligned. After achieving this alignment, the postures 
revolve around the centre of equilibrium, which ensures agility in all the 
body movements.
2.	
Hán (contain not reveal) the chest by relaxing and emptying the chest from 
within. To avoid hunching the back while doing this, visualise the crown of 
the head as being suspended from above. According to Li Ya Xuan, who is 
a senior of Yang Cheng Fu, this principle does not exist in the art of Tàijí. 
It is actually a principle from Xing Yi and it was Cheng Wei Ming (a senior 
student of Yang Cheng Fu) who, before learning Tàijí ,was training the Xing 
Yi system and later brought it into Tàijí. As time passed, Tàijí practitioners 
took it as one of the ten important points of the Yang family.
	
To bá (spread) the back, remove all tension in the back muscles and allow the 
shoulder blades to drop downwards. The qì will only sink into the dāntián 
when the chest is relaxed and emptied and the back is spread.
3.	
Relax the yaō (waist) by letting go of tension around the torso’s mid-section 
and seat the kuà (hip joints) into their sockets. When the yaō (waist) relaxes 

 78   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   79
and the kuà (hip joints) are seated, there is an increase of mobility in the 
upper body. Bear in mind in Tàijí, when the yaō (waist) is referred to, it 
includes operating in conjunction with the kuà (hips joints), turning as one.
4.	
Many Tàijí practitioners oversimplify the differentiation of substantial from 
insubstantial, by only distinguishing the distribution of weight. In fact it 
has more to do with the force distribution within yourself, and with your 
response to the changes of your opponent’s force distribution, in relation to 
yours. When the opponent is yang then you must respond with yin; this is 
the harmony of yin and yang. When the opponent is yang and you respond 
with yang, that is actually resisting, which is called double heaviness. Double 
heaviness is a major fault in Tàijí. Therefore if substantial and insubstantial 
are clearly differentiated then one will not commit the mistake of double 
heaviness. Remember that substantial and insubstantial have no fixed 
place and time, as they changes with your movement and those of the 
opponent.
	
Understanding your own substantiality and insubstantiality includes the 
principle of cross alignment (discussed further in my [note 9] interpretation 
of Chang San-Feng classic): When releasing jìn (relaxed force) from the right 
substantial foot, it should be transmitted through the left substantial arm 
and vice-versa. This is what is meant by “when the right is substantial the 
right is insubstantial and when the left is substantial the left is insubstantial”. 
The ability to harmonise and change with any situation can only be achieved 
when able to differentiate the substantial from the insubstantial forces.
5.	
To chén (sink) the shoulders, is to soften the area around the shoulder joints 
and let go of the shoulder blades, with a downward intention. This connects 
the arms with the body. But one must not forcefully push the shoulders 
down. One must cultivate the relaxing of the body muscles, and when the 
body muscles are relaxed it will create a space for the shoulders to sink 
and therefore the sinking of the shoulders is related to the body relaxation. 
Hanging the elbows is achieved by letting the weight of the arms drop them 
downward, but not to a point of collapsing and when the shoulder joints are 
closed then the dropping of the elbows is overdone. In tuīshŏu (pushing-
hands) the sinking of the shoulders allows the jìn (relaxed force) to pass 
from the torso into the arms, while the hanging of the elbows functions 
as a pivot, directing the jìn (relaxed force) into the feet of the opponent to 
break the root. The inability to either chén (sink) the shoulders or hang the 
elbows, affects the relaxing and emptying of the chest and spreading of the 
back, which in turn restricts the sinking of the qì into the dāntián.
6.	
Use yì (the mind) not lì (brute strength). This is the difference between the 
internal and external martial arts. In external martial arts the training is 
often based around techniques using muscular strength and brute force. 
Such practice can only lead to the development of lì or physical power. 
Tàijí develops an internal power not requiring physical strength, by training 
the movements to be initiated by the yì (mind). The yì directs the qì, and 
the qì motivates the physical movement. When the qì reaches maximum 
compression, the jìn (relaxed force) produced becomes an internal power. 
Whilst physical strength has a limit, the power of the mind has no such 
constraint.
7.	
To achieve upper and lower body synchronisation, an understanding is 
required of the sequence of changes that create the movement. The 
sequences are timed to change in relation to one another as connected and 
synchronised movements, not merely as co-ordinated actions. All movements 
in the Tàijí form and pushing-hands are whole body synchronisations not 
regional movements, and all the movements begin from the base. The 
importance of this principle is stressed in the Tàijí classic The Understanding 
of the Thirteen Postures (principle 24) and In the Song of Tuīshŏu (principle 
2).
8.	
For the internal and external to be in harmony, whenever the mind has 
an opening intention, the physical movement must also open. Conversely 
whenever the mind has a closing intention, the physical movement must 
also close.
9.	
From beginning to end in the Tàijí form, the movements are a continuous 
flow without disconnection. Like the rolling flow of the river, it never ends 
and leaves no gap for an opponent to enter. The qì is also a continuous flow, 
circulating like the currents of the ocean, with the jìn (relaxed force) as the 
constantly recurring waves.

 80   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   81
10.	 When physically moving in Tàijí, the mind must remain calm and attentive. 
Calmness can only be achieved when the focus is brought within. In the Tàijí 
form, calmness of the mind cultivates awareness of the changes throughout 
the movements. While during tuīshŏu (pushing-hands), calmness enables 
better detection of the opponent’s intention. Calmness does not mean that 
the mind is empty of all thought. Calmness means the mind is aware of the 
process at the present moment, not thinking of the past or future.
11.	 Visualise two men using a two-person saw. Working in harmony they utilise 
the principles of sticking, adhering and following, while not resisting or 
disconnecting. It is an example of not resisting and not disconnecting, and 
the principle of yielding and following.
12.	 A meat rack is a place to hang dead flesh. During tuīshoǔ (pushing-hands), 
don’t lean on your opponent or use insensitive heavy hands, as your 
opponent is not a meat rack. Stick using the lightest touch necessary to 
connect to his or her base. You are not a meat rack either, so don’t allow any 
force to build up on you, or let them lean on you.
13.	 Visualise a line running centrally through the body from the níwán (crown 
of the head) connecting to the huìyīn meridian point, and this serves as 
the body’s axle (central axis). Wherever a millstone is located, it still moves 
by rotating around its axle, and similarly the body position can change but 
it should revolve still around the central axis. To function effectively the 
millstone must remain level and the axle vertical, and similarly the body’s 
central axis should be kept upright, particularly while turning. The centre of 
equilibrium can be easily maintained when turning like a millstone. 
14.	 Be like a self-righting doll which, being weighted at the bottom and light at 
the top, cannot be pushed over. Visualise the crown of the head as being 
suspended from above, so that the spine is straight and the body vertical, 
and the centre of equilibrium can be maintained at all times. The feet must 
be firmly grounded, the upper body relaxed, the mind calm with continuous 
waves of chén (sinking) deep into the earth, even while an external force 
is affecting you. When this is achieved the upper body will be relaxed and 
light, the base will be grounded and heavy, like the self-righting doll.
The Body of 
10.	
Tàijíquán
The body of Tàijíquán is the Tàijí 
form. Regardless of what style of 
Tàijí is practiced, the Tàijí form is the 
first thing the beginner learns. The 
Tàijí form is a set of movements that 
the beginner uses to experience 
the Tàijí principles, and to learn to 
synchronise their body movement 
in the Tàijí way. It is also in the 
form that practitioners cultivate 
the awareness of their body, the 
relaxation, the sinking process, and 
the relaxed force itself. As Teacher 
Huang said, learning the form is like 
building a generator to produce the 
electricity (relaxed force). The Tàijí 
form is where the practitioners try 
to experience the Tàijí principles 
in the movement, without the 
distraction of any external forces 
affecting them. In other words, it is 
where the practitioners learn to understand themselves. If you are not aware of 
yourself, and your own changes, then you cannot even begin to understand the 
changes of another. That is why the old masters of Tàijí, when asked, always said 
”everything is in the form.”

 82   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   83
The Practice and Cultivation of the 
11.	
Tàijíquán Form
“Give up yourself and follow the other” it is said in the Tàijí classic “the Song 
of Tuīshoˇu”, the classic of partner work or tuīshŏu (pushing-hands). To be able 
to “follow the other” you must accept your opponent’s force and you need to 
have the correct structure to accept it. When someone offers you wine, you can’t 
possibly ask them to pour the wine on your palm, so you need a wine glass in 
which to receive it.
The Human Level
When you begin learning Tàijíquán you do not have any structure, so the teacher 
will teach you the Tàijí form to give you a structure in which to experience the 
principles and, regardless of the style of Tàijíquán you learn, the form is the 
foundation of the art. In learning the form the student must adhere strictly to the 
principles in the Tàijí classics as detailed in the previous chapter. The learning of 
the Tàijí form can be divided into two parts:  practising the form, which focuses 
on the external movements, and then cultivating the form which focuses on the 
internal aspects.
The Chang San-Feng classic states “Do not have deficient places. Do not have any 
hollow and protruding places. Do not have disconnected places”, and in the Wang 
Ts’ung-Yueh classic it says “It must not be overdone or fall short.”   So, what is the 
meaning of hollow?  In this context, hollow means the movement is incomplete 
or falls short, and protruding means the movement is overdone or unnecessary. 
Disconnection is where the movement is not in one flow and uses excessive 
tension, i.e. a regional movement instead of whole body synchronisation. All of 
these will result in ‘deficient places’ and so these principles stress the importance 

 84   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   85
of accuracy and precision of movement when practicing and cultivating the Tàijí 
form. This is further stressed in the Wang Ts’ung-Yueh classic which says “A miss 
of a millimetre, is a miss of a thousand miles.”
The classics also say, “Use your mind, not your brute force”. In Tàijí the mind 
comprised of two components: first there is the intention and then it must be 
followed by the awareness. Intention without awareness is a “dead” mind, a 
mind without life, and right from the outset the beginner should start using the 
mind to remember the movements of the form.
In Tàijí there are thirteen ‘postures’. First there are Ward off, Roll back, Press and 
Push (the cardinal directions) followed by Pluck, Split, Elbow and Shoulder (the 
oblique directions). Collectively they are referred to as the eight methods. Then 
there are Forward, Backward, Turn Left, Turn Right and Centre, which are known 
as the five doors, or ways.
The ‘Centre’ is referring to the centre of equilibrium, and it is the foundation of 
all the other twelve postures as they must all have the central equilibrium within 
them. Without central equilibrium you cannot talk about relaxation and changes, 
and it must be maintained when you are in position, in transition and during the 
issuing of the relaxed force.
“Tuck in your tail bone, have a consciousness on the crown of your head as 
if suspended from the top” and “Raise your spirit, you will have agility in the 
movements”. Although these are from different classics the meaning is the same, 
and if in the practice of the Tàijí form the practitioner imagines that they have an 
empty matchbox on their head, then these principles will be realised. It is also 
said to “Stand like a level scale, you will have the mobility of the wheel” and “Do 
not tilt or lean”. To realise these principles the hips need to be relaxed and seated 
throughout the form. All of these principles in the various classics emphasise the 
importance of the physical structure to maintain the central equilibrium. When 
the central equilibrium is maintained the practitioner will feel as if the spine has 
been lengthened and is balanced on all sides, “When the body is upright and 
tranquil, the feet will support all eight directions” (The Understanding of the 
Thirteen Postures)
If we consider the central equilibrium as the body of the Tàijíquán form, then 
relaxation would be its soul. Many practitioners have mistaken relaxation to be soft 
and floppy, and in the Tàijí form or free partner work you will see people wriggling 
and ‘noodling‘. But actually, to be relaxed in Tàijí is to let go of any unnecessary 
tension that you might hold in the body or accumulate during movement. In 
order to relax you must first be able to feel the tensions in the body, and if you 
cannot feel your own tension then you can never relax. Relaxation comes from 
mind cultivation, using the mind awareness to tell the body to relax, and as the 
percentage of awareness of the body increases so will the degree of relaxation. In 
the end only the very minimum of tension is required to sustain the postures or 
movements, and anything more than is necessary is called tension in Tàijí. There 
is no end to cultivating this kind of relaxation and you can continue to increase 
the percentage of it. Some say that you should have absolutely no tension in Tàijí, 
but if you have no tension to support the structure and sustain the movements 
you will collapse on the floor!  In the Chinese language the word is “fang sung”, 
which literally means to “let go“ and carries more meaning than just “relax“, but 
what should we let go of?  We should let go of unnecessary tension in the body.
The first principle of the Chang San-Feng classic states “At the moment of 
movement, the body should be light, agile and connected (synchronised)”. 
It also says, “The whole body should be connected, do not allow the slightest 
disruption”. The first connection is in the feet, which are the ‘root’ of the body 
posture, and they should be relaxed so that the ‘bubbling well’ is in connection 
with the ground. As Cheng Man Ching said in the Song of Substance and Function, 
“I have words for those who understand. When the bubbling well has no root, 
you have no control of the hips and waist”. This will connect the feet (or foot, 
in postures where all the weight is on one foot or when sitting back) to the 
ground. The second connection is between the body (torso) and the base (legs). 
In the “Important points of the Yang family” it says “relax the waist”. What is not 
commonly known is that in the teaching by the old masters the waist is referring 
to the hips (kuà) and the waist, not just the waist alone. The hips are not only 
relaxed but should also be seated, and my teacher, Huang Sheng Shyan always 
said to sit the hips. This will connect the torso to the base. The last connection 
is between the arms and the body, which is achieved by relaxing and sinking 
the shoulders. All of these physical connections should be maintained when in 
position, in transition and during the issuing of the relaxed force, both in the Tàijí 
form and partner work.

 86   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   87
Any turning in the Tàijí form should be initiated by the hips and the waist, and the 
turning of the hips and waist is related to the changes from the base. If you turn 
the hips and the waist without the base changing then it is a regional movement 
and not a whole-body synchronization. In the Chang San-Feng classic it says 
“Control by the waist” and the Song of the Thirteen Postures states “The source 
of life is in the waist area”; “Be aware of the waist at all times”. To have mobility in 
the turning of the hips and waist and to “Turn like a mill stone” (important points 
of the Yang family) and to “Stand like a level scale, be mobile like wheel.” (Wang 
Tsúng-Yueh). Both hips should be seated at all times and the centre of equilibrium 
maintained. Cheng Man Ching said that the base (legs) are the yang and the upper 
body and arms are yin. The base initiates all movement (changes) and the body 
and arms follow the changes of the base. All movements in the form and partner 
work are initiated by the base, and the turning of the hips and waist should be in 
relation to changes in the base. The Chang San-Feng Tàijí classic states “If there 
is no flexibility or momentum, and the body becomes disrupted, the fault should 
be sought in the waist and legs”
In this stage of practicing the form, attention should be paid to the accuracy of 
movement and then to put these principles into the form.
The Earth Level
The next stage is to cultivate the form, focusing on understanding the movements, 
the internal changes and the principles of the form.
“The spirit gathered within”; this is to have the calmness of the mind. To have 
calmness it’s not that the mind is blank, but it’s to have the mind awareness totally 
within the body to listen to the movements and changes within the body and not 
wander off. The classic in the Song of thirteen Postures and The Understanding of 
the thirteen Postures say “Let the qì flow freely throughout the body”. Direct the 
qì like threading the nine bend pearls (the phrase means flowing continuously) it 
reaches everywhere unrestricted”. However the mind awareness must not be too 
intense as intense awareness will lead to stiffness. “The qì should be stimulated”, 
so when you feel your movements the mind travels, and when the mind travels 
the qì travels; “the xīn (mind/heart) motivates the qì”.
In Tàijíquán, any movement is a whole body movement not a regional movement. 
“Keep this in your heart, remember, when you move every part moves, when you 
settle, every part settles” (Understanding of Thirteen Postures) and “The upper 
and lower body should move in synchronisation” (The Song of Hitting Hands). 
Therefore it is important to understand the sequences of changes that create 
each movement of the form and for them to change in relation to each other 
in order to adhere to these principles. This is the meaning of understanding the 
movements.
In the Chang San-Feng classic it says “Throughout all movements, the body 
should be light, agile”. To be light is to be relaxed and to let go of any unnecessary 
tension in the body whilst in position and during movement. In the Chinese 
language the words light, agile and lively always go hand in hand. You need to 
be light in order to have agility (to have mobility in movements) and when you 
have agility you will be lively. Relaxation is cultivated by mind awareness and it 
is the foundation for the cultivation of the sinking and borrowing of energy from 
the earth. Therefore, as the mind awareness is listening to the changes in the 
movements it should tell the body to let go of unnecessary tension in any part of 
the body it passes through. It is not just listening to the adjustment of the joints 
in the feet, ankles, hips, shoulders, elbows and wrists, but also the adjustment 
and relaxation of every muscle in the feet, calves, thighs, body, arms and even the 
neck and face adjusting in relation to each other. It is particularly important to 
cultivate the movement of the muscles (the melting sensation) in the body, upper 
and lower back, the tail bone area and the relaxation in the chest from within. 
The movements in the body will enable the base (legs) and the arm movements 
to be connected, otherwise they will only be coordinated and therefore moving 
independently of each other.
In the cultivating of the sinking and borrowing of energy from the earth (issuing 
of relaxed force) in the Tàijíquán form, the late master Huang Sheng Shyan said 
the mind must be aware of three points in the body: the bai hui meridian point at 
the crown of the head, the yŏngquán meridian points in the feet (known as the 
bubbling well), and the lau kong meridian points at the centre of the palms. Both 
the sinking and the borrowing of energy from the earth are mental processes and 
the cultivation of relaxation still continues in these processes.
In the Tàijíquán forms when you make any movement you must let the mind 
awareness flow down from the bai hui meridian point, and in doing so you will 
be “swallowing the qì of the heaven”, as Cheng Man Ching put it. Continue to 

 88   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   89
let it flow through the head and the neck, down through the body, the legs and 
the feet, through the yŏngquán meridian points deep into the ground under 
both feet. Visualise the ground under both feet is disappearing and feel the feet 
go deep into the ground, not pressing against the ground. If in a bow stance or 
parallel stance this should be visualised into the ground under both feet, or into 
the ground under the substantial foot either when sitting back or in a posture 
where all the weight is on one foot. This process is known as sinking in Tàijíquán, 
and throughout it the practitioner must continue to experience the relaxation 
and adjustment of every muscle in the posture. Sinking will give the practitioner 
stability and create the root in the feet to connect with the energy of the earth, 
thus producing the relaxed force (jìn). Although relaxation is the foundation of 
sinking, working only on relaxation without sinking will not give the practitioner 
stability or produce any relaxed force.
Once the movement arrives at its final position there is a release of the relaxed 
force. After sinking the mind awareness into the ground, the practitioner must 
then visualise it rebounding up from the ground under the feet, through the 
“yongquán”, the legs and the body, through the shoulders into the arms and 
passing through the “lau kong” meridian  points to the finger tips. This process 
is to borrow the energy from the earth (issuing of relaxed force). In the Chang 
San-Feng classic it states “The root is in the feet, the force is discharged through 
the legs, controlled by the waist and expressed through the fingers”. Therefore 
during the borrowing of energy from the earth, there should not be a decrease of 
connection of the feet with the ground, so you must continue to experience the 
adjustment of every muscle in the legs, body, arms and fingers, and there should 
also be waves of sinking during the release of the relaxed force. The process 
that happens in the releasing of the force from the feet through the body to 
the finger tips is the same process as fājìn. Therefore the practitioner should try 
to remember the experience and when executing the fājìn in tuīshŏu (pushing-
hands) they must feel the same experience. In the Song Of Understanding of 
the Thirteen Postures it says “When executing fājìn (issuing the relaxed force), 
the body should completely relax and sink”. At this stage the continuity of the 
physical movement is not important because the practitioner has to complete 
and experience the changes in both the sinking and the release of the relaxed 
force.
Both in the process of sinking and of borrowing the energy from the earth, the 
mind awareness travels extensively throughout the whole body. When the mind 
travels, the qì travels and therefore the qì is stimulated, and so the principles of 
”sink the qi into dāntián” (Wang T’sung-Yueh classic), “let the qì flow freely through 
the body” (Song of Thirteen Postures) and “The xīn (mind/heart) motivates the 
qì, direct it to sink, so that it can be stored and concentrated into the bones” (The 
Understanding Of The Thirteen Postures) will all be achieved.
Stability in the base (lower body) comes from relaxation and sinking, not from 
digging in or resisting. When the base is stable the middle body (hips and waist) 
is agile and the arms and hands are light (relaxed) and sensitive, and so the 
foundation for the next stage of Tàijí practice, partner work, is established.
The Heaven Level
In the Wang T’sung-Yueh classic it states “From proficiency evolves into 
understanding the forces, from understanding the force precedes spiritual 
clarity” (Wang T’sung-Yueh classic). This will be achieved when the practitioner 
understands the external and internal changes in the Tàijíquán form. The ability 
to understand small changes within the body and in movement dictates the level 
of refinement of one’s Tàijíquán practice.
Understanding the forces and spiritual clarity involve your own as well as those 
of your opponent or training partner. When you are able to experience all the 
principles from the Tàijí classics regarding the forms, and you understand the 
movements of the Tàijí form, then you have achieved the understanding of the 
forces and a spiritual clarity of yourself.

 90   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   91
The Application of 
12.	
Tàijíquán
If the body of Tàijíquán is the Tàijí form, then the application of Tàijíquán is in the 
pushing-hands. In all pushing-hands you have the forward movement, backward 
movement, turning left, turning right and the central equilibrium and they are 
the external representation of the five elements. Pushing-hands also cultivates 
the internal qualities of the five elements, namely sticking, joining, adhering, 
following, non-resistance and non-disconnection. If the internal qualities of the 
five elements are not present, then it is not Tàijí pushing-hands. It is important to 
remember however, that the foundation for developing the internal qualities of 
the five elements is in relaxation and sinking, which in turn are cultivated in the 
Tàijí form.
Sticking in Tàijí is indirect sticking, in that you stick with your mind and relaxed 
force, which can only happen if you are relaxed and sink. Sticking in Tàijí is like 
having a magnet and you use it to stick to a piece of metal and lift it off the table. 
In Tàijí you stick (with your mind and relaxed force) to the root of your opponent 
so they are disconnected from the ground. Joining is where you and opponent 
become one, there are no longer two individuals. Adhering is where they can’t 
get rid of you, and you are like their shadow. Following is to give up your own 
opinion and go along with whatever your opponent wants to do (but without 
giving up your central equilibrium). Resisting is to go against the opponent’s force, 
and to disconnect is to lose contact. When you come to make contact with your 
opponent you must offer them sticking, joining and adhering, following, non-
resisting and not disconnecting. To do the opposite is against the Tàijí principles. 
Only when you have cultivated the internal qualities of the five elements will you 
then have the foundation to develop listening. When you can listen, you can yield 
and neutralise and know your chances.

 92   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   93
The Art of Partner work in 
13.	
Tàijíquán
This aspect of Tàijí training is often called pushing-hands among today’s Tàijí 
practitioners, but in the old days it was known as an exercise to sense and feel, 
and for some unknown reason it later became known as pushing-hands.
Pushing-hands is actually a very misleading term because different words imply 
different actions, for example the word ‘run’ immediately makes you think of 
running, you use your legs to run. With ‘kick’ you will use your legs to kick and 
with ‘push’ you will use your hands to push. If you read through the Tàijí classics 
there is not a single word about pushing. Even the classic The Song of Tuīshŏu 
(Pushing-hands) is incorrectly translated into English, and according to the Chinese 
characters it should be The Song of Hitting Hands. There is no pushing in Tàijí, only 
fājìn, the issuing of relaxed force. When you think of pushing you use your hands 
and when you think of fājìn you will use your legs and the Chang San-Feng classic 
clearly states “The root [of the relaxed force] is in the feet, discharged through 
the legs, controlled by the waist and expressed through to the fingers”). Cheng 
Man Ching said that when you push it should be as if pushing with your legs. 
Therefore in my teaching I am using the term ‘partner work’ instead of ‘pushing-
hands’ to get the students out of the concept of pushing and of using the hands. 
The function of the hands in Tàijí is to stick, adhere, listen (sense) and to express 
the relaxed force. The arms and hands should always be light (relaxed).
 The structure (the way that you move and change) externally and internally, and 
the experience of relaxation, sinking and issuing of the relaxed force that were 
cultivated in the Tàijíquán form must be present and experienced in the partner 
work. If one does not experience the same changes in the partner work then the 

 94   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   95
structure is broken. It is just like you have made a wine glass and when someone 
offers you the wine, you break the glass and try to receive the wine.
The foundation is “to give up yourself and follow the other” (from the Wang 
Ts’ung-Yueh classic). My Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan always said “Give up yourself 
and follow the other without objective opinions, flow with your heart (xīn) and 
let it be natural”. To ‘follow the other’ you must accept them completely, and 
the Tàijí form gives you a structure to do that, but the difficult part is to accept 
the other not only physically but also mentally. To be able to do this you have to 
know how to “give up yourself”, but what to give up?   The first thing is to give up 
the concept of using brute force. In the ten important points of the Yang family 
it states “Use your mind, not brute force.”  The next thing to give up is one’s ego 
and objective opinions, and by doing so you are then prepared to receive and be 
in harmony with your opponent and their force. The only thing you must not give 
up is your centre of equilibrium. One must “follow the other” but must not follow 
blindly. You follow the opponent initially until they have made a commitment 
and then you take over the role of leading and this is the meaning of first being 
motivated and then becoming the motivator.
When you witness a Tàijí competition in pushing-hands, or free pushing in a Tàijí 
class, you will most likely see both practitioners lock into what looks like a wrestling 
match with all the Tàijí principles thrown out of the window. It is because they 
fail to understand this principle from the Wang T’sung-Yueh classic: “Someone 
after years of dedicated practice being unable to adjust or neutralise, and is easily 
defeated by others, has not understood the fault of double heaviness”. To avoid 
this fault, you must understand the harmony between yin and yang. This will lead 
to understanding the forces (dŏngjìn)”.
Most practitioners misunderstand the term “double heaviness” and make yin 
and yang into something mysterious. Double heaviness has been mistranslated 
in all English Tàijí books to mean ‘double weight’, and a lot of Chinese Tàijí 
practitioners also have the same misconception. Therefore it is most commonly 
(mis)understood that if you have equal weight distribution on both feet then you 
commit the fault of double weight (double heaviness). Double heaviness is a major 
fault in the practice of Tàijíquán, but if it really were about weight distribution 
then the fault is committed in the very beginning posture of the form, as well as 
in the posture of cross hands and at any point in a transition where the weight is 
equal in both feet. To clear up this misunderstanding it is important to note that 
double heaviness is not about weight distribution at all; it is actually about force 
distribution in the body. 
Yin and yang are terms used to describe two opposite things that relate to 
each other. They could be right and left, up and down, internal and external, 
positive and negative or male and female, but in this context we are referring to 
substantial and insubstantial. Wherever there is force it is known as substantial 
(yang) and wherever there is no force it is known as insubstantial (yin). The 
Chang San-Feng classic states “In every part of the body there is both substantial 
and insubstantial. The principle of substantial and insubstantial applies to every 
situation”. One must understand that substantial and insubstantial has no fixed 
time or place and it changes with the movement of the body. 
Whenever there is an incoming force and you meet it with force then that is 
‘double heaviness‘. Alternatively, when there is an incoming force and you yield 
and flow with it, this is the meaning of harmony of yin and yang. When both 
parties have no force it is known as double lightness and in Tàijí this is not a fault. 
In the partner work when an opponent’s force coming in, then wherever the force 
lands must instantly become insubstantial, or in other words you must soften 
at the point of contact. Again, this is the meaning of harmony of yin and yang 
(substantial and insubstantial should be clearly differentiated). The principle of 
“when the opponent is hard (strong) I become supple; this is yielding.” is referring 
to the harmony of yin and yang and when this principle is fully understood the 
practitioner will not fall into the fault of double heaviness. 
Yielding is not about running away from the force or brushing it away, as that 
would be disconnection. Yielding is the ability to accept and receive the force 
without resisting it and the ability to do that will enable the practitioner to 
always be in an advantageous position. How much force do we allow to be on 
our structure (body) before we yield, some say four ounces of force but I believe 
even four ounces is still too much. In the Wang T’sung-Yueh classic it says that “a 
feather cannot be added; a fly cannot settle”, and therefore as long as the force 
is heavier than a feather or a fly we must yield to it. One of the ten important of 
Yang family says “I am not a meat rack”. A meat rack is where you hang the meat 
and therefore you must not allow your opponent’s body-weight to be on you (you 

 96   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   97
are not a meat rack) nor do you allow your body-weight to be on your opponent 
(he is also not a meat rack). 
The Song of Hitting Hands says “Stick, connect, adhere, follow without 
disconnecting or resisting”. To stick is to make the first contact and to adhere is 
not to lose contact, so when you are able to stick and adhere then you will be 
able to follow. Yielding is like sitting back in the Tàijí form and following is like 
moving forward in the Tàijí form. The first level of sticking is to stick at the point of 
contact, the second level is sticking to the centre of gravity of your opponent and 
the highest level is to stick to the root of your opponent. If one understands the 
principle of yielding to an incoming force and flowing with the back of the force, 
then there will be no resisting or disconnecting.
In most free partner work (free pushing-hands) situations we observe practitioners 
using all their strength (even the strength of sucking the milk from the breast, 
when they were an infant). But the Wang Tsung-Yueh classic Tàijí classic says 
“Considering the verse; Only four tael are required to neutralise a thousand catty 
of force” shows that victory is not due to superior strength. In the Song of Hitting 
hands it also says “Let him use immense li (brute strength) to hit me. Lead his 
movements with only four tael to neutralise a thousand catty of force”. So this 
shows it is not about who is strongest and there should no fear of brute force, but 
how to neutralise a thousand catties force with four tael?
“Draw him into emptiness, gather (the force) then send it out.” This is the method 
to apply the principle of using four tael to deflect a thousand catties. One cannot 
draw the opponent into emptiness while resisting against an incoming force or 
holding it out, since this will only help to support the opponent’s balance and 
stability, keep them in their own circle and give them a structure to use. The 
foundation of ‘draw your opponent into emptiness’ is the ability to receive and 
accept the opponent’s force and pushes. It is also the foundation of yielding and 
neutralising. However it is not about receiving and accepting the force on your 
body but to receive and accept the force and let it pass through your body and 
through the feet into the ground using the process of sinking. As Cheng Man 
Ching says the body has a limited space, but the earth’s space is practically 
limitless. By receiving and accepting the opponent’s force into the ground you 
cause him to over commit himself and, in doing so, draw them out of their circle 
(centre). You can then work with them within your own circle, and the chance of 
their root being disconnected is much greater. The greatest pleasure of drawing 
your opponent into emptiness is that you do not impose the push on them, but 
that they bring the chance of pushing (issuing) to you.
There is a difference between drawing an opponent into emptiness and sitting 
back and extending the force. In sitting back and extending the force you will only 
weaken it and the opponent is still in connection with his root. Therefore there 
is still plenty of time and distance for the opponent to adjust to the changes. 
Whereas drawing the opponent into emptiness creates a void that the opponent 
falls into, disconnecting him from his own root immediately, and giving very little 
time or space to adjust and respond.
The most common mentality of Tàijí practitioners when they engage in free 
partner work is they are always busy in looking for, and imposing pushes on, 
their partners. If one looks closely at the Tàijí classic it actually informs us when 
there are chances to issue (release, push). For example, The Understanding of the 
Thirteen Postures says “Seek the straight in the curve”, where straight represents 
issuing and the curve represents neutralising. It means the opportunities for 
issuing are to be found in the neutralising, because only in neutralising will the 
opponent be drawn into emptiness and his root will be disconnected and thus 
cannot easily change. In this way the chances of issuing are offered to you. As long 
as the opponent can move and change, it means that their root is still connected 
and they still have their central equilibrium, so don’t waste time or risk exposing 
yourself by imposing a push on them.
In the free partner work, whether yielding and neutralising or following and 
issuing, one should never move only in straight line or turn in only one direction. 
As the Tàijí classic The Understanding of The Thirteen Postures says “In advancing 
and retreating there should be a change of direction”, the change of direction is 
motivated by the hips and waist in relation to the changes of one’s base (legs). 
Also the principles “The source of life (movement) is in the waist area”, and “Every 
moment keep your awareness in the waist” from the Song of Thirteen Postures 
stress the important the waist (hips) plays in the changes of direction. However 
it is not that one completes a movement in one direction before changing to the 
next direction. It is always in the middle of one direction that one changes to 
next, and in the middle of that one changes to the third direction, and so on. So it 

 98   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   99
is always a change in multiple circles, and in this way the opponent’s pushes will 
always fall into emptiness. 
In most pushing-hands situations we will observe the practitioner’s palms fixed 
at one point; if it is not under the elbows of one it will be on the arms of the 
other, and throughout the sticking and adhering the contact points never seem to 
change. This error is called “dead hands” because they remain at the same spot, 
are not lively and do not change in harmony with the changes in situation. We 
must understand that because the opponent’s centre of gravity, substantiality and 
insubstantiality change with their movements, then one must also change the 
contact points according to the situation, and so give the hands “life”. Professor 
Cheng Man Ching said, in the Song of Substance and Function, “The whole body 
functions as the hands. The hands are not (the only) hands”. To apply this, one 
must follow the principle of “In moving forwards and backwards, there must 
be folding”. It means that when the palms are neutralised then the lower arms 
follow, when the lower arms are neutralised the elbows follow, when the elbows 
are neutralised the shoulders follow and when the shoulders are neutralised the 
body follows. However there is no fixed rule to the order of changes, it depends 
on the situation.
14.
Fājìn - Discharging or Releasing the Relaxed Force
The common mistake of most Tàijí practitioners in tuīshŏu (pushing-hands) 
is pushing the opponents. There is no pushing in Tàijí; you only propel your 
opponent, causing them to fly off, by discharging your relaxed force (jìn). When 
you push your opponent, they will only stagger back, but if you propel them 
by discharging your relaxed force then both of their feet will be uprooted off 
the ground and they will fly off a great distance. If you are stiff and tense then 
there will not be any relaxed force. Trying to discharge relaxed force while you 
are stiff and tense is just like planting an apple tree in the garden and hoping 
you will see peaches growing on it; it will never happen. As the name “relaxed 
force” suggests, you can only have relaxed force if you are relaxed. It is stated in 
the Understanding of The Thirteen Postures, “When discharging the relax force 
(jìn), one must be completely and thoroughly relaxed and sink, and focus in one 
direction.” Note the emphasis on completely and thoroughly relaxing!
When you think of pushing you will push with your hands, but the relaxed force 
is discharged from the legs, not from the hands. As Grandmaster Cheng Man 
Ching said, issue as if you are issuing with your legs. The Chang San Feng Tàijí 
classic states, “The root is in your feet, release through your legs, control by the 
waist and express through the fingers.” In the discharging of the relaxed force 
one should not lose the connection of the feet, hence the root is in the feet and 
the root comes from sinking. Therefore you must be thoroughly relaxed and 
sink! The direction of the force is controlled by turning the hips and waist, and 
then from the fingers it is sent into your opponent.
The first experience a Tàijí practitioner has of the fājìn (discharge of relaxed 
force) is in the Tàijí form. At the end of every posture in the form, and before 
the beginning of the next posture, there is a releasing of relaxed force in the 
posture.
The practitioner must remember the experience and the feeling at the moment
of release, and seek the same feeling when practicing fājìn in pushing-hands.

 100   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   101
In the Understanding of the Thirteen Postures it states, ”First absorb, then 
release.” Like a spring, there must first be compression before you have rebounding 
force. The legs are just like a spring and, like animals taking a leap, they first drop 
their legs to produce a spring like force in order to leap. In the same Tàijí classic it 
says, “Absorb the force like drawing the bow.” Before you shoot an arrow you first 
have to draw the string of the bow to create a spring force to send the arrow out. 
The legs are the string of the bow and dropping the legs is drawing the string of 
the bow. The same classic also states, ”discharging the force like shooting an 
arrow.” When you shoot an arrow the bow does not move. Similarly, when you 
discharge the force your body (bow) does not lean or move forward. When you 
shoot an arrow, you do not focus at the arrow (your opponent), you focus beyond 
the arrow at the target, hence the meaning of focus in one direction. The best 
analysis of the force being discharged from the legs and not the hands was 
described by Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan. He said,  “your hands are like radar 
detecting enemy aircraft. Your legs are like a surface to air missile. When you 
have detected the enemy aircraft you do not throw the radar at the plane, you 
fire the missile at them.”
Yielding and Neutralising
15.
The fear of being pushed, and the desire to push, both result in the Tàijí tuīshŏu 
(pushing-hands) turning into a wrestling match. The main obstacle to being able 
to yield and neutralise is one’s ego. In the beginning one has to yield first before 
being able to neutralise. Yielding is to extend the incoming force and change its 
direction, and neutralising is to nullify the force so that it is no longer acting on 
you.
The importance of yielding is greatly emphasised by the late Tàijí grandmaster 
Professor Cheng Man Ching who famously said, “ Invest in loss.” When my late 
Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan studied Tàijí under Professor Cheng, Teacher Huang 
was already an accomplished White Crane master. Professor Cheng accepted 
Teacher Huang as his student only if he agreed to a condition of yielding and not 
pushing; not to even think of pushing for four years; a condition which Teacher 
Huang readily accepted.
In the Wang Ts’ueng-Yueh Tàijí classic it says “ Give up yourself, follow the other.”, 
and this concept is the foundation for yielding. One has to give up the ego, one’s 
own self and one’s opinions in order to yield, and this is the main difference 
between Tàijí and other martial arts. Most martial arts teach you to overcome 
others while in Tàijí you have to overcome yourself to be good. Yielding is about 
accepting your opponent and accommodating them. How much force should you 
allow to be on you before you yield?  The Wang T’sung-Yueh Tàijí classic says “A 
feather cannot be added, a fly cannot settle.”  So, as long as the force is  heavier 
than a feather or fly you must yield to it. Yielding is not moving away from the 
force; that would be disconnection. Yielding is just like when you push into a 
sponge, where the sponge only moves as much as you push, and it does not move 

 102   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   103
more then you push. Similarly, it is the feather or the fly (the force) which sets 
you in motion, and it is not that you move away from it. No matter where or how 
strong the force is on you, your yielding must be a whole-body synchronization 
not a regional movement. In the same classic it states, “When the opponent is 
hard I am subtle, that is yielding.” Only with yielding one can avoid committing 
the mistake of double heaviness.
“Seek the straight in the curve” it says in The Understanding of the Thirteen 
Postures. Straight is attacking, whereas the curve is yielding and neutralising. 
You will find your chances of attacking in the yielding and neutralising. The only 
method of applying the Tàijí principle of leading four ounces to deflect a thousand 
pounds, is to draw the opponent into emptiness. One must have the ability to 
accept and accommodate (yield to) the opponent’s force to be able to draw them 
into emptiness. After yielding, when the incoming force is weakened, one must 
nullify the force by accepting it not onto the body but bring it through the body 
and into the ground. The process of bringing the force into the ground is the 
same as the sinking process in the Tàijí form. In the end, yielding and neutralising 
become one.
Everybody knows how to yield. Just treat the incoming force as if it were a sharp 
knife, then you will naturally know how to yield. Professor Cheng said, “Invest in 
loss, loss is gain and gain is loss.” Is just like the person pushing is giving out Tàijí 
money and the person who is yielding is accepting Tàijí money. As time pass, 
the person pushing gets poorer and the person yielding gets richer. Teacher 
Huang says ”the more you fall, the better you become.” In the first five hundreds 
time you are pushed, you do not know why you get pushed out. On the eight 
hundredth time you are pushed, you start to realize where you are stuck but you 
still get pushed out. In the one thousandth time you get pushed, you know where 
you are stuck, but now you are able to become unstuck, yield and neutralise, and 
so now the situation belongs to you. However, when you “Give up yourself,” you 
should never give up your central of equilibrium. Similarly, when you “Follow the 
other” you should never follow blindly. Instead yield when the force is coming 
into you and, once your opponent has committed themselves and their force has 
been neutralised, you must take over the lead and counter attack. In this way you 
are first being motivated, but then become the motivator, and this is the meaning 
of “Seek the straight in the curve.”
When you get used to being pushed, you start to feel that being pushed is not a 
big deal. You will lose the fear of being pushed and will be relaxed, then you will 
be able to stick, join, adhere and follow, not resisting and not disconnecting in 
pushing-hands. Equipped with these attributes, you can go on to develop a level 
of sensing (listening force) in Tàijí pushing-hands.

 104   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   105
 
16.	
Tàijíquán - The Art of Receiving
Tàijíquán is no different from any other exercise or martial art if it is practiced 
without understanding the principles and without putting the principles into the 
movements. Regardless of the various different Tàijí styles or Tàijí forms, they are 
all based on the same set of Tàijí classical texts. They are: The Chang Sang Feng 
Tàijí Classic, The Wang Ts’ung Yueh Tàijí Classic, The Song of Thirteen Postures, The 
Understanding of the Thirteen Postures, The Song of Substance and Function, The 
Song of Pushing-hands and, in the case of the Yang style, The Ten Important Points 
of the Yang Family. Practitioners should put the principles into the movements, 
rather than going into the movements to look for the principles. 

 106   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   107
To put the principles into the movements, the practitioner must constantly read 
and understand the classics and, when practicing, the mind must ‘ask’ and the 
body must ‘answer’ (respond).
The foundation of Tàijíquán practice is in the Tàijí form. By neglecting the Tàijí 
form and only focusing on pushing-hands, it is like working on the function 
(application) without the substance (body). By knowing yourself and knowing 
your opponent you will excel in pushing-hands. Knowing yourself comes from 
the practice of the Tàijí form, where you learn to be relaxed, balanced, connected 
and synchronised without any external forces affecting you. The relaxed force of 
Tàijí is cultivated and developed in the practice of the Tàijí form.
In the Chang Sang Feng classic it is stated, “At the moment of movement, the body 
should be light, agile and most importantly connected (synchronised)”. To achieve 
this, the central equilibrium must be maintained in position, in transition and in the 
release of the force, both in the Tàijí form and in pushing-hands. To maintain the 
central equilibrium the practitioner has to keep in mind the following principles: 
The Song of Thirteen Postures”, Tuck in the tailbone and keep a consciousness on 
the crown of the head (baˇihuì meridian point), the body will be agile if the head 
is held as if suspended from the top. ”The Wang Tsúng Yueh Tàijí Classic, “Do not 
tilt or lean. Stand like a level scale”. Only when the central equilibrium has been 
achieved, can one talk about changes and relaxation. The central equilibrium is 
the foundation of Tàijíquán. It is one of Tàijí’s ‘Thirteen Postures’ and all the other 
twelve postures must have the central equilibrium within them.
The practice of the Tàijí form is not about whether you know the whole form, 
nor is it measured by the number of different Tàijí forms or styles you know. It is 
about putting the principles into the form and understanding the movements in 
the form. The Tàijí form is only a tool for you to transfer the principles from the 
Tàijí Classics into your body, and eventually the form should become formless 
because any movement you make should have the principles within it.
Besides having the Tàijí principles, the practitioner must also understand the 
movements in the form. After learning the whole form the practitioner must seek 
to understand the sequence of changes that creates the movements and get the 
sequences to change in relation to each other, and in so doing, achieving the 
principle that is stated in the Understanding of The Thirteen Postures, ”Remember, 
keep this in your heart, when you move every part of your body moves, when you 
settle every parts settles”. In different postures in the Tàijí form, the arms, the 
legs and the body might be in different positions and you might face different 
directions, but the sequence of changes and what happens in it is the same. That 
is why the great Tàijí teachers of the past always say, ”when you understand one 
movement, you understand all the movements”. In fact the most effective way of 
practicing the form is the single posture practice.
The changes within any movement always begin from the base (feet, ankles, 
knees and hips joints) and the letting go of excess tension from the calves and 
thighs muscles. The base creates the body (trunk) movements - the relaxation of 
the chest from within, the melting sensation of the body muscles and the letting 
go of excess tension from the upper, middle and lower back, creating movements 
in the back. The body creates the arm movements – the sinking of the shoulders 
and dropping of the elbows. The movement of the body comes from mind 
cultivation, so the mind awareness must be in the body to imagine and visualise 
the body’s movements happening. After prolonged cultivation the movements 
will materialise. The base and the arm movements will only be connected if there 
are movements in the body, otherwise they are only coordinated.
Relaxation in the Tàijí Form: 
There is a difference between relaxation and being ‘soft and floppy’. “fàngso¯ng” 
(relaxation in Chinese) means to ‘let go’. To let go of what?, to let go any 
unnecessary tension in the posture (body) and movements. In Tàijí we use the 
minimum amount of tension to sustain postures and movements, anything more 
than is necessary we call it tension. As our awareness of our body increases so 
does our ability to let go of unnecessary tension. When the upper body becomes 
lighter and the base become heavier, it is the sign of relaxation taking place. In 
the end, the upper body becomes yin and the base become yang and, when the 
practitioner reaches the highest level, only the feet are yang the rest of the body 
is yin.
Sinking: 
Sinking is a mental process and it is very important in Tàijí practice. It can only 
come after the practitioner is able to relax. Sinking develops the root in Tàijí, 
to enable the practitioner to ‘borrow the energy from the earth’. Sinking is also 
a training to take any incoming forces into the ground (internal neutralising) in 
pushing-hands. The sinking should start from the baˇihuì meridian point (crown of 

 108   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   109
the head), and this is to ‘swallow the qì of the heaven’. It should go through the 
body, legs and feet, through the bubbling well into the ground.
To borrow the energy from the earth, the practitioner must visualise the sinking 
awareness rebounding from the ground, travelling through the bubbling well, up 
through the legs, the body and the arms, past the láogo¯ng meridian point and to 
the fingertips. When the practitioners master the Tàijí form, then they will have a 
structure to receive the forces in pushing-hands.
Pushing-hands: 
In the old days it was known as an exercise of ‘sensing and feeling’, but somehow 
it was later called pushing-hands. Pushing-hands is a very misleading phrase 
because actually it has nothing to do with pushing and nothing to do with the 
hands. Most Tàijí pushing-hands we see is just like a wrestling match, or like two 
goats locking horns, using brute force and thus deviating from the Tàijí principles. 
The reasons are that one person wants to push, the other doesn’t want to be 
pushed. The bigger one uses his body weight and strength, while the smaller one 
tries to dig in to hold his ground. It always takes two hands to clap!
We have to look into the principles, understand them and then proceed into the 
practice. One of the Ten Important points of the Yang family says, “Use your mind 
,not your brute force”, as long as you use your mind the door to Tàijí pushing-
hands is open for you to enter; if you still want to use brute force it is just like 
locking the door and try to get in again. If you still want to use brute force, don’t 
come to learn Tàijí because even you have ten lifetimes you cannot achieve the 
essence of Tàijí.
 In the Song of Tuīshoˇu it says, “Let him use immense (brute) force to attack me” 
and “Lead his movements with only four tael to neutralise a thousand catty of 
force”. This clearly shows that a greater force will not stand a chance if it is dealt 
with using the Tàijí principles. 
The foundation of Tàijí pushing-hands is receiving, not pushing, and the highest 
form of Tàijí force is the Receiving Force (jièjìn), and so therefore the practice of 
receiving should start from the beginning. Professor Cheng Man Ching said that 
“If you are not prepared to receive (incoming force) do not come to learn Tàijí 
because you will be wasting your time in your lifetime you will not get the essence 
of Tàijí”. In the Wang Tsúng Yueh Tàijí classic it is stated, “A feather cannot be 
added, a fly cannot settle” and in the Ten Important Points of Yang family it says, 
”I am not a meat rack”. All of these points emphasise that you should receive and 
accept the forces, not resist against them.
In the practice of Pushing-hands the body should have all the elements that are 
experienced in the Tàijí form. The key to receiving is to throw away self (ego) 
and invest in loss. “Invest in loss; small loss small gain, big loss, big gain”, what 
beautiful words spoken by Professor Cheng Man Ching. It seems that by receiving 
(yielding) you are losing but that is not the case because the person pushing is 
actually giving you “Tàijí money”. As he keeps pushing he gets poorer and as 
you keep receiving you get richer. When the day comes that he can no longer 
push you (that means he is Tàijí bankrupt), then perhaps you could give him 
some interest on the “Tàijí money” he gave you!  In the beginning the practice 
of receiving can be very frustrating because you get pushed over all the time. As 
you progress you start to realise where you get stuck, and why, but you will still 
get pushed over because you can’t yet do anything about it. Gradually though, 
you learn how to ‘unstick’ yourself and take the force down into the ground. 
Receiving must be done with total acceptance, in the process of receiving if you 
have even the slightest intention or thought of countering, then it is receiving 
without total acceptance. When you master the art of receiving, you will able to 
perform the principle that is stated in The Song of Pushing-hands, “Draw him into 
emptiness, gather the force and send it out”.
Receiving (yielding and neutralising) is not to receive the oncoming force on to 
the body as the body has only a limited capacity to absorb the force, but to take 
it into the earth, which has a relatively limitless capacity. The process of receiving 
the force into the earth is similar to the sinking process in the Tàijí form except 
that it starts at the point of contact [rather than the baihui].
The upper body is yin and the base is yang, so any adjustment to incoming 
movements and forces must begin from the base and, as in the Tàijí form, the 
body and arms follow the changes of the base. The hands are used only to stick 
to the opponent, and at any chance to release your force it should be released 
through the legs with the feet remaining firmly grounded to the earth. As it is 
stated in the Chang San Feng Tàijí classic, “The root is in the feet, discharged 
through the legs (relaxed force), controlled by the waist (direction) and expressed 
into the fingers”. No matter how big or small the issuing is, the hands never 

 110   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   111
extend more than a space of one inch (the extension is only the result of sinking 
the shoulders).
In pushing-hands, you do not go into it to look for a push or plan to set up a chance 
to push, you just follow the changes of your opponent and let the push happen 
by itself. If there is a will to push, then there will be intention and desire. ‘In the 
principle everything is base on the principle of yin and yang. When the yin reaches 
its extreme it will become yang and vice versa. So whenever you think you are 
in the most advantageous position you are actually in the process of going into a 
disadvantaged position and whenever you are in a most disadvantaged position 
you are in the process of going to an advantageous position. It is always better to 
change from a disadvantage to an advantaged position, rather than the other way 
around. When you reach the highest level of pushing-hands, there are no pushes 
from you. Your body structure is an empty void and any force that comes into 
contact with it travels into the earth and rebounds back, returning to the person 
issuing the force. This is the highest level of Tàijí force, the Receiving Force, where 
the practitioner neutralises without neutralising and issues without issuing. To 
attain this level one must be able to “Forget yourself and follow the other without 
your own opinion, follow the heart and mind and let it be natural”.
To borrow the words of Professor Cheng Man Ching when speaking about pushing-
hands, “It is an idea without motives, an act without desire. What a wonderful art 
Tàijí is; it has nothing to do with pushing, it is all about receiving”. As practitioners 
of Tàijíquán we should be true to the art, not only preaching the principles, but 
also practicing and adhering to them. Tàijí is not only an exercise for health or a 
martial art for self-defence, it is most importantly the Dao (philosophy) of life.
My 
17.	
Tàijí Journey
It all began in early 1980 when I was holidaying in Taipei, Taiwan. I was staying 
in the house of Mr Hii the brother-in-law of my sister’s godmother. Mr Hii is a 
Tàijí practitioner; he would wake up every morning at 5am and go to the park to 
practice his Tàijí form and pushing-hands with fellow practitioners until 7:30am. 
I was in Taipei for a week and every morning I would follow him to the park and 
watch him doing his routine. I found the art of Tàijí fascinating and especially 
watching him pushing people much younger than him, effortlessly (he was 60 
and retired). He spoke of a famous Tàijí  practitioner by the name of Huang Sheng 
Shyan who lived in Malaysia and has a Tàijí school in Malaysia and Singapore.
On returning to Singapore, and with the image of Tàijí still fresh in my mind, 
I started to look for the Tàijí school of Teacher Huang Sheng Shyan and found 
out that the Singapore Tai Chi Association was the school founded by him, and 
they had a number of different training centres. I went to the main school at 
Geylang Road to road to enrol (6 months later the school was moved to its 
present premises at Public Mansion Building on Balestier Road) and was told by 
the instructor to put my name down and come back in a month time when the 
new class would start.
At the first lesson, all the students came dressed in a track suit and t-shirt and 
were required to buy the Tàijí school uniform, which is white loose cotton pants 
and a white t-shirt. After the first lesson, with sweat pouring over my body (32 
degrees Celsius in the evening), I realised that Tàijí is really not as easy as it looks. 
The slow movements were very deceiving and it was actually very demanding on 
the legs indeed, yet we were not even training in the form, only the first relaxing 
exercise!

 112   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   113
I continued to attend my class, twice a week, Monday and Wednesday from 7pm 
to 8:30pm. But it was only after 3 months in the school that I found out it opens 
at 5pm and close at 10pm with other classes running. So I began to arrive earlier, 
at 5pm, and do my own practice before the start of my class and then stay back 
to practice until the school closed at 10pm. After six months in the school, one 
of the senior instructors told me the school runs from Monday to Friday and if 
I wished I could come every day, and of course I did not hesitate to accept the 
offer. 
My first instructor was Mr Lee Yuan Wan, who was focussed very much on the 
accuracy of the forms. The other instructors in the school were also very helpful, 
and if one had any question about practice they were more than happy to help. 
Mr Chong Chih Pin, one of Teacher Huang’s early students, was also an instructor 
in the school and helped me a lot in explaining the principles of Tàijí, and I could 
say it is because of his influence that I have always focused on the Tàijí classics 
in my own practice. As I got to know the instructors better, I was invited to stay 
for supper after training. After class it was customary for the instructors to take 
turns to cook supper, and then they would all eat before heading home. I was in 
the catering business at the time, so I would also bring dishes of food from the 
canteen as a contribution to the nightly supper. 
It was also at the Singapore school that I first met my good friend Patrick Kelly, 
because he always stopped by the Singapore school on his way to Malaysia to 
meet and train with Teacher Huang. After a year at the school, I was invited to 
join the Sunday morning training by the head instructor of the School, Mr Seah 
Mok Tai whose Tàijí skill was considerably higher than the other instructors. 
He contributed greatly to the Singapore school and I am very grateful to him 
as he passed on a lot of his knowledge of Tàijí in the Sunday class. He is also 
Teacher Huang’s oldest disciple both in years and age (about 4 years younger 
than Teacher Huang). In his later years he had some disagreement with Teacher 
Huang and because of the politics in the school, he left. Sadly he passed away 
only one month after teacher’s Huang death.
I always heard the instructors comment on how good Teacher Huang’s Tàijí skill 
was. At that time I had this thought in my mind; he is a human being and I am 
also a human being, so if I get the correct guidance and put in the effort, logically 
I could become as good as him. But of course now the most important thing 
is I enjoy the art. In those days I had a routine before the class started. When 
I arrived I would look at the photograph of Teacher Huang on the wall in the 
school, and tell myself that one day I am going to learn directly under him. At that 
time, he would come to visit the Singapore school once a month, or sometimes 
once every two months, for three or four days at a time. I think that he must 
have noticed me, because every time when he visited Singapore and he saw me 
practicing he would come up to me and say “young man, everything is in the Tàijí 
form”. I said to myself “the Tàijí form must be important otherwise he wouldn’t 
keep repeating the same sentence to me”.
One day, after I had been training for almost two years in the school, Teacher 
Huang was visiting, he approached me and ask me if I could come up to Kuala 
Lumpur (Malaysia) in a month’s time to give a helping hand. The Kuala Lumpur 
school was having its tenth anniversary celebration and it was at this celebration 
that I first saw Ben Low and Robert Smith, but of course I was a small fry then 
(and I still am a small fry now) so no-one took much notice of me. About one 
week before the celebration we had to move about one thousand copies of the 
anniversary magazine, each about two inches thick, and had to put the school 
stamp on every one of them; a task that took four of us, myself, a student from 
Taiwan and two instructors from the Kuala Lumpur school, a long time. 

 114   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   115
It was then that I heard that after the celebration Teacher Huang was going to 
retire from active teaching and move back to Kuching in Sarawak, East Malaysia. 
One evening, before the celebration, I approached him and told him of my wish 
to study under him for two years. He looked up at me, smiled and said, “Two 
years is not enough, if you are really keen you need four years.” I told him that’s 
no problem but I first needed to go back to Singapore to sort my affairs. Back 
in Singapore I told my mother I planned to leave the catering business, and of 
my decision to study Tàijí. She was not so happy about my decision, but my dad 
was very supportive, and he said, “You don’t have to be in the catering line but 
whatever you do decide to do, be good at it.”  My friends of course, thought that 
I was crazy.
Arriving in Kuching
Two months later I flew into Kuching, and was met at the airport by the Kuching 
school instructor. On arriving at Teacher Huang’s house, the first think he told me 
is “ Young man, don’t think about go¯ngfu¯, no matter how fast and effective you 
are, you will not be as fast and effective as a bullet. Treat Tàijí as an art and enjoy 
it as an art”. I asked him about the payment of school fees, food and lodging for 
my four years stay. He smiled and said that I didn’t have to pay him a single cent, 
as long as I studied the art of Tàijí diligently and propagated it, that in itself was 
payment enough.
The first time we went out in a car that was driven by Teacher Huang was very nerve 
racking. He would change gear and step on the accelerator without completely 
letting go of the clutch and would change lane frequently without looking in the 
rear mirror, to the distinct annoyance of other drivers. After this experience, I 
asked him how he managed to get his driver’s licence, and he explained that the 
tester happened to be his student. I suggested to him that I would be his driver 
from now on and would also cook his meals. He accepted the offer, but arranged 
to have someone else come in to clean the house and do the laundry.
For the first week, apart from doing the up and down movement, there was no 
other training. Most of the time I was sorting through loads of photo albums, and 
probably thousands of photographs, and rearranging them for him. Of course, I 
was not really happy because I was there to do Tàijí  not stack photos, but as I 
knew that he was a good teacher, I told myself to be patient. Later I realised that 
he was already training me, and although initially I had been frustrated, I later 
took it in my stride. As I became more patient, I also became more relaxed and 
my qì would naturally sink. As the Chinese saying goes, “When the heart is in 
balance, the qì will be in harmony”. Later, Teacher Huang told me that the reason 
he asks anyone that comes to Kuching for training to do housework for the first 
few days, is so that he can study their character. 
It was during one of these this photo arrangement sessions that I saw him 
standing with his palm stuck to the washing basin (it was a portable basin that we 
used to wash our face in the morning, about one foot in diameter and six inches 
depth) four feet off the floor!  I was amazed and asked him about it. He got a 
basin from the bathroom, filled it with water and put his right palm into the basin 
and stirred the water. Less than a minute later his palm was stuck to the face of 
the basin and he lifted it off the table. Later he told me that it was not good to 
do it very often, especially when you are over seventy as it used up a lot of body 
energy. One of his other abilities was that he could put his arm on the table, and 
when you felt the arm, it was really soft, but even using both hands you couldn’t 
ever lift it off the table.

 116   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   117
Beginning of the Training
After a week, Teacher Huang gave me a timetable for training, starting with the 
first session from 4am to 8:30am in the morning. I would do my own training from 
4am until 6:30am when he usually came from his room to train. The second session 
was from 3pm to 5pm, and usually it would be self-practice but occasionally he 
will come over to check. Then at 5:30 pm I would join a group of thirteen senior 
students in their class, which was also held in Teacher Huang’s house. Most of 
them were older students of teacher, and they were all businessmen, doing it 
mainly for health. That was except for Mr Yek who was very serious in his training 
and one of the best students Teacher Huang had at that time. He was also the 
leader of the group. 
The last training was from 8:30.pm to 9:30 pm and was the Fujian White Crane 
session. Teacher Huang wanted me to learn and propagate White Crane as well, 
because he felt that he was being unfair to his White Crane teachers if we only 
concentrated on promoting Tàijí and not White Crane. Most of his early students 
in the fifties and the sixties also learned White Crane from him. He told me that 
Fujian White Crane and Tàijí shared the same principles, but that Tàijí was more 
refined, rather like the difference between an uncut diamond (White Crane) and 
polished diamond (Tàijí).
In the first Tàijí lesson he told me that although I had learned the exercises, both 
the short and long Tàijí forms and pushing-hands in his school, that I should forget 
all that I had learned and start again from the very beginning, and only practice 
the movements as he taught me. 
For the first six months of my stay he only taught me using his native dialect 
(Fuzhou) and I initially didn’t understand a single word of it and I had to ask 
the seniors students for explanations. Most of his senior students in Kuching 
understood his dialect. After six months I was just beginning to understand his 
dialect, and he then began to teach in Mandarin!  Mandarin is the common 
language of the Chinese people. However, I realised that in a sentence of ten or 
so words, it would contain of at least four words in his dialect - he had completely 
mixed up both languages. He said that “if you don’t understand what I say you will 
not be able to learn my art” and this was illustrated on a number of occasions. 
Once when we had a centralised training at his house, a lady student come into 
the kitchen and said that Teacher Huang wanted a coconut. I told her that what 
Teacher Huang actually wanted was a round stool not a coconut. In his dialect 
the word for ‘stool’ sounds like the word for ‘coconut’ in Mandarin. Sometimes 
in the meeting of the committee of different branches of the school he will begin 
speaking in Mandarin, but when he got excited he would switch to his dialect 
and everybody at the meeting had to remind him to speak in Mandarin. It is very 
important to be able to understand a teacher to learn from him. It also happened 
to me with some of my own students for example when I was in Germany teaching 
a group the fixed push hand exercise of ‘ward-off, roll-back, press and push’ one 
of the newer students asked an older student why did I keep saying “ward-off, 
roll-back, President Bush”, which of course gave us all quite a giggle at the time. 
It took another student three years to finally understand me when I said “central 
equilibrium”.
        
The Training methods of Teacher Huang
I spent eight months, repeatedly working from the beginning of the Tàijí form 
to the first Grasp the Sparrow’s tail. Teacher Huang kept emphasising that the 
essence of the Tàijí form is in the Grasp the Sparrow’s tail, just as the essence of 
Fujian White Crane was in the San Chin. He stressed that if you can experience 

 118   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   119
the principles in this portion of the form, you will be able to experience it in 
all the movements in the whole Form. He always emphasised that Tàijí is not 
about learning different movements but it is about the ability to experience the 
principles within the movements. When I felt that I got a movement correct, 
he would show me a little more detail of the movement that I was working on 
and  highlighted the importance of looking for the movements contained within 
the movement. One of his favourite sayings was, “Do not just know what has 
happened, you must know how it happened”. 
For the first month I had to do the up and down movement, the five relaxing 
exercises and the Tàijí Form with an empty match box on my head. This was to 
train the principle of having a light consciousness on the crown of the head at all 
times. If my chin was jutting out he would come over and without warning  he 
would use his long thumbnail to push it back in. 
Often when I was practicing the Tàijí Form he would come from behind and push 
my heel with his foot. Later he told me that if my sinking is not in the feet or 
into the ground then my heels will be easily moved. Every time he taught me a 
movement, he would ask me to feel his body while he was doing it. He would 
then say, “ Visualise the movements that you feel on my body happening in your 
own but do not use muscular force to make it happen”. 
The worst part of the training was pushing-hands, if I was leaning forward, he 
would give me a slap on my face and then ask me why I was offering my head for 
him to slap!  If I resisted against an incoming force he would drop me onto the 
floor with a downward force when we were training in the living room, or send 
me flying onto the concrete bench when we were training in the courtyard. 
To train the issuing of the force, I split my  time between pushing the air, pushing 
the wall and pushing a fifty kilo sandbag. The sandbag was hung from a bar by 
two thick chains so that when you pushed the sand bag it would swing away, and 
then as it swung back, you had to accept the force and visualize transferring it 
into the ground, and then push the sandbag out again. 
Sometimes the traditional teaching methods hurt, especially when you got hit 
for a making mistake. However because you quickly learnt not to repeat that 
mistake, it would only happen once or twice. Another hardship with traditional 
training was that you couldn’t take a break unless the teacher said to. Often my 
legs would ache so much during the first eighteen months, that I had to hold on 
to the side of the wall to squat down to go to the toilet (his house had only a 
squatting toilet). 
I remember Mr Yek (Sing Ong) told me that I had come to study with Teacher 
Huang at just the right time, because he had refined his Tàijí considerably and it 
was a period when he was most willing to impart his knowledge. According to Mr 
Yek, in his early days he was not as open in his teaching.
Learning to observe the Tàijí Form
Every so often during my stay in Kuching, the instructors from the different 
branches of the school plus students from overseas, would come together for 
training. At those times Teacher Huang would ask me to observe them practicing 
the first section of the form. Later in the evening before going to bed, I would 
spend an hour with him in his room. Usually he talked about the Tàijí classics and 
sometimes he would tell stories of his younger days including about when  he 
was a guerrilla fighting against the Japanese. Afterwards he would ask me what 
I had observed in the students’ form, and then he would point out the things I 

 120   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   121
hadn’t seen. The next day, when I observed the students I wold look for things 
that Teacher Huang had pointed out. 
On other occasions he would bring me along on his tours of his schools in Malaysia. 
When he went around the classes correcting the students, I would follow closely 
to observe how he corrected them. Sometimes I asked him why a student had 
a particular mistake. He pointed out that different students respond differently, 
and even though they may have the same mistake, he would not necessarily use 
the same method to correct them.
Back to Singapore
After four years, before going back to Singapore, I asked Teacher Huang for his 
permission to teach outside his school. He asked me why and I told him that I just 
wanted to teach and practice, and did not want to be caught up in on politics of 
the school, it. He agreed to my request. 
When I was back in Singapore, the instructors of the Singapore school and my 
Tàijí friends thought that having spending four years with Teacher Huang, that 
my Tàijí must be good. I told them that the four years only gave me a better 
understanding of Tàijí, and although I may have learned a lot, it didn’t mean that 
I had yet digested what I had learned. Besides, just because a teacher is good, it 
doesn’t mean that all of his students will be good. 
I was still going back to Kuching regularly for training, and when Teacher Huang 
came to Singapore I would stay with him in the Singapore school. That is why 
my wife who I met when I was in Kuching and married one year after being back 
in Singapore, always joked that when Teacher Huang was around she had no 
husband. 
In 1989, at Patrick Kelly’s invitation, Teacher Huang visited New Zealand and I 
went along. It was during this visit that Patrick came up with the idea of applying 
for  New Zealand permanent residency for Teacher Huang and for me to as a co-
applicant to assist him. 
Although Teacher Huang had lived in Malaysia for thirty years, the Malaysian 
government hadn’t granted him citizenship. So in 1991 after we received our 
New Zealand residency, I went to New Zealand with the plan that Teacher Huang 
would join me in July 1992.  Unfortunately in April of that year Teacher Huang 
was hospitalised. I flew back to Singapore to visit him, although for the first few 
days he remained in a coma. After he regained consciousness, he tried to talk to 
me but I couldn’t understand him. So I gave him a pen and on my palm he wrote 
“Tàijí, relax and sink”, and that was the last Tàijí advice he gave me. Later when I 
visited him that evening again he used his arms to show some Fujian White Crane 
form movements, and realising what he was getting at, I told him not to worry, 
that I would propagate the White Crane as well. Which is why I have taught it to 
my students Paul Fretter, Pete Dobson, Bob Honiball in the UK, and Hella Ebel in 
Germany. I also believe that my teacher may have had a premonition of his death, 
because about one year beforehand he repeatedly told me to learn as much as I 
could from him, as his time in this world was not long.  Teacher Huang died in his 
hometown, Fuzhou China, in December 1992
Meeting Teacher Sam Tam
About 16 years after my teacher’s death I met teacher Sam Tam through my 
student Torben. One of Torben’s students had attended a workshop of Teacher 
Sam and told Torben about him. When I saw a video clip of Teacher Sam’s 
pushing-hands, I immediately recognised that this man was good and that he was 
really practising what he preached. It is not easy to find a Tàijí exponent like that, 
and especially one who is able to demonstrate the principles and applications 
of Tàijí practically. I immediately asked Torben to contact with. Initially I spoke 
with teacher Sam over the telephone; he was very friendly and we talked often. 
Later I asked his permission to go to Vancouver where he resides, to train under 
him. Teacher Sam is very open minded and genuine in his teaching, as he is over 
the phone. Even now he still addresses me as Tàijí brother but for me he is my 
teacher and I will always be his student. He is very soft in his yielding yet very 
powerful in his relaxed force. I visited him on five occasions but unfortunately 
due to personal circumstances I am not currently able to continue to visit. If the 
circumstances change I would certainly like to visit him again, as it is very rare to 
find a Tàijí teacher of this calibre. Although my visits to him were short, it enabled 
me to understand Tàijí from a different perspective which in turn enhanced my 
Tàijí and helped me in my development.

 122   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   123
My introduction to Europe
In 1991 the Stichting Tàijí in the Netherlands invited Teacher Huang to give a 
seminar in Holland. One of the committee members, Erich Volke, had earlier 
visited Teacher Huang in the late eighties. My teacher declined the invitation 
because of his age and instead asked me to go on his behalf. That was how I 
began my Twenty years of association with Tàijí in Europe.
Lessons learned during my Tàijí journey
The first thing I realised was that there were a lot of professional instructors 
already in my teacher’s school. Many of them had been performing Tàijí for a long 
time but their skill of Tàijí didn’t seem what it could be. The problem I observed 
was that most treated it as a job, teaching but not training. I had learned that 
even if you teach you must still train, because when you teach you are teaching 
what the students should be doing, and when you train you are training what you 
should be doing. It is only through training that you discover new knowledge and 
improve. 
There were people around my Teacher Huang who used words to flatter him, 
and some who tried to deny other students from getting close to him. I love and 
respect my teacher greatly but I do not idolise him, my relationship with him was 
more like father and son. There were things that I could bring up with him that 
other students wouldn’t dare to. It is important as a teacher not to encourage 
Guru like worshipping because you will lose touch with reality. For students it is 
important not to idolise your teacher, because your teacher is only a human like 
you.
I also observed that for a number of my teacher’s students, once they became 
inner disciples, they didn’t train as hard as they had before. I think my teacher 
did notice, although in his later years he again actively encouraged the practice of 
taking inner disciples. It was in 1989 that I first witnessed the ceremony of inner 
discipleship. It was for two senior students, one from Seremban and the other 
from Singapore. At that time he told me I would go through the ceremony at a 
later date. I told him that the ceremony was not important, to me what was more 
important was that I learned his art, respected and loved him as a teacher.  In the 
month before I left for New Zealand, he asked me to go to the Seremban school 
in Malaysia to go through the ceremony of discipleship. When I was there I found 
that not only was I being accepted as a disciple, but also as his adopted son. 
Grumbling and deaf students
There were quite a large number of students in my teacher’s school, and some 
of the instructors would complain that my teacher didn’t impart his skill to them. 
When my teacher was explaining to the classes, some complained that he always 
repeated the same thing, or that he kept changing things. This group of students 
and instructors showed little or no improvement in their practice, and were being 
left behind in their Tàijí. Teacher Huang often said that the students do not give 
him a chance to teach. He also said when he teaches a student “step one”, which 
the student doesn’t practice, then they won’t have a foundation for “two” so 
how can he continue to teach?  For the students that complained that my teacher 
always repeated the same things, they had forgotten that the same things had 
a different meaning to each student and at different levels. They forget too that 
my teacher did not stop refining and sometimes movements have to change for 
refinement.
My wish as a Tàijí practitioner
As far as I’m concerned it isn’t necessary to differentiate between the various 
styles of Tàijí. Whether it’s Chen, Yang, Wu, Sun or Hoa or Cheng, they are all in 
accordance with the same principles contained in the Tàijí classics. Therefore Tàijí 
should be considered just Tàijí, regardless of what lineage you follow or what race 
you are, we are just human beings. 
When I left for New Zealand one of my fellow students told me that I shouldn’t 
teach the Westerners too much, and another said not to teach them too much 
too soon. What a selfish attitude and a complete contrast to Teacher Huang’s 
teaching. He always stressed to teach all that you know and that in Tàijí Dao 
there are no race barriers. When you teach what you know, you will have space 
for new knowledge. Through practicing with your students you experience 
your knowledge, then it becomes wisdom. Importantly you should always give 
knowledge to the students when they are ready for it. 
No student should claim that he is his teacher’s only successor or that he is the 
only one that teaches what his teacher taught. All the students of the teacher 
are his successors. None of us can even claim that we are teaching our teacher’s 
art. We can only say that we are teaching our understanding of what we were 
taught. We are not computers that are programmed to operate the same way or 
duplicate what was before. We are individuals with our own different minds and 

 124   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   125
emotions. Naturally our understanding of the same thing will differ and hence the 
difference in teaching and approach. But as long as it is within the Tàijí principles 
then it is correct. In the beginning you learn the external principles of the Tàijí 
and so your movements must be as close to your teacher’s as possible. But once 
you go deeper into the internal principles and movements, your form will change. 
Your movements will have your own characteristics, so it will be slightly different 
from your teacher and your fellow students. If a student has been practicing 
Tàijí for twenty or thirty years and claims that their Tàijí form is identical to their 
teacher’s, then I think that’s sad because they may have only copied their teacher 
and not developed the art any further. 
Throughout the history of Tàijíquán we can see students have refined, changed 
and some even progressed beyond their teacher. Yang Lu Chang developed his 
own style after studying with Chen Chang Hsin of the Chen style. Wu Chien Chuen 
developed the Wu style after learning from the Yang style. Even within the Yang 
style, Yang Cheng Fu refined the form of his grandfather. Then Professor Cheng 
Man Ching developed the Simplified 37 Tàijí form and my Teacher Huang Sheng 
Shyan’s transition of movements differed from his teacher, Professor Cheng Man 
Ching. Teacher Huang also developed his own Tàijí form, the Refined Simplified 
Form. Things can be refined but they shouldn’t be changed just to be different. If 
something remains the same for hundreds of years then there is no improvement. 
If the teachers are always better than their students then that is a tragedy for the 
art. Teacher Huang once said to me, “When you reach a certain level, you must 
move out of your teacher’s shadow and develop.” 
When a teacher is willing to give and a student is willing to receive, there is a 
true teacher/student relationship. However it’s only a relationship in name not 
in the art. It is when the student possesses the skill of the teacher, that they have 
a relationship in the art. When the student surpasses the skill of the teacher, 
they are repaying the teacher. The art of Tàijí not only requires practice in the art 
itself but also finding balance in other aspects of your life. I am lucky to have a 
wonderful family, a supportive wife Janice (Siah Ait Tiang), sons Andy (Inn Siang), 
Louis (Inn Tze), Jamie (Inn Zheng) and Francis (Inn Yu). I also have a number of 
great students from different countries, who walk with me on my Tàijí journey, 
sometimes pointing out the scenery that I missed. To be good in the art of Tàijí, 
you must first enjoy it. You must also be honest with yourself and true to the art. 
As Teacher Huang said, “first and foremost learn how to be a human being”.
Stories told by Teacher 
18.	
Huang Sheng Shyan
The Fujian White Crane Period
Becoming a student of the Fujian White Crane system.
Teacher Huang’s mother died from an injury during a feud with a different clan 
in the village where he lived. As the Huang clan was a minority in the village they 
were frequently subject to being bullied by others. So, after his mother’s death, 
Teacher Huang decided to take up martial arts.
He first studied under the renowned 
Fujian White Crane Grandmaster Xie 
Zhong Xiang in 1924, at the age of 14. 
At that time Grandmaster Xie was 
already 74 years old. Realising the 
potential of his young student, and 
because of his own advancing age, in 
1927 Grandmaster Xie referred Teacher 
Huang to continue the study of the 
White Crane system under his senior 
disciple Ch’en Shih Ting. Teacher Huang 
had to leave his village in the morning 
and travel to the village where master 
Ch’en lived (a couple of hours walk) to 
train with him. In between the training 
periods he had to help to work in the fields and, as the youngest student, he also 
had to prepare meals for the older students. While the older students were 

 126   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   127
having their meals, Teacher Huang would do his own training. Quite often after 
his training when he went back for his meal, he found that the older students had 
not left much for him. To overcome this problem, every time he had finished 
prepared the meals, he dished out a full bowl and hid it behind the altar (where 
the ancestral tablets are placed) to eat it later, after his training.
In 1930, Master Ch’en Shih Ting introduced Teacher Huang to further his study of 
White Crane under his good friend and renowned White Crane master P’an Ch’un 
Lian. It is also under Master P’an that Teacher Huang begin his study of traditional 
Chinese medicine and his speciality in bone setting. In 1933, at the age of 23, 
Teacher Huang decided to travel to Shanghai (the most modern city in China at 
that time) to see the world and as he put it, to broaden his knowledge.
Time in Shanghai
When he arrived in Shanghai, the locals immediately recognised he was from the 
countryside by the way he was dressed. Whilst walking to his uncle’s house, two 
men walked either side of him, grabbed him by the arms and pushed him into an 
alley to try and rob him. Before the two men knew what had happened they were 
lying on the floor groaning. As Teacher Huang continued to beat them up his Aunt 
happened to pass by and saw the commotion. She asked him to stop fighting and 
the two would-be robbers took the opportunity to escape. After explaining to 
his Aunt what had happened, she replied that Huang should give them a good 
beating, to which he replied, “I did but you stopped me.”
When he was in Shanghai, Teacher Huang made friends with a number of different 
martial art teachers due to his openness. He exchanged martial art knowledge 
with them by learning their system and explaining the White Crane system to 
them. He also started a White Crane school in Shanghai. In those days Shanghai 
was run by different triads (secret societies) and to run a school there you must 
have substantial martial skill in order to be respected by other martial schools.
In Shanghai he also heard a case of a very good martial art master getting drunk 
and being tied up, put into a sack and thrown into a river. That is why he never 
consumed alcohol himself and he even forbade his students from drinking. He 
always stressed that drinking caused irresponsible behaviour.
Capture of a Japanese Sergeant
During the occupation of China, Teacher Huang joined a group of guerrillas to fight 
against the occupying Japanese force. On one occasion they received information 
that a Japanese patrol would be passing through a certain village, and so Teacher 
Huang and his men decided to set up an ambush. In the fight that followed, 
almost all the members of the Japanese patrol were killed except for a sergeant 
who tried to escape. Teacher Huang chased after the sergeant and caught him 
after a brief struggle. The other members of the guerrilla group wanted to kill the 
sergeant, but Teacher Huang stopped them and said, “This man has a family too; 
we do not kill unless it is absolutely necessary otherwise we are no different from 
the Japanese.”  After the war, he met the sergeant again in Taiwan and he was 
really grateful to Teacher Huang for stopping his men from killing him.
Teacher Huang’s first martial art competition
In 1934, at the request of his White Crane teacher, Master P’an Ch’un Nien, he 
returned to Fuzhou to take part in the all Fujian martial arts competition. In the 
preliminary round he met an opponent by the name of Chung Sih-Chung, and the 
bout ended in a draw. Teacher Huang was impressed with Chung’s skill and felt 
they would meet again later in the competition.
In the semi-final, Teacher Huang’s opponent was a Master Lee, who was famous 
for his leg sweep. It is reputed that with one sweep of his leg, he could lift a 100 
katties sack of rice off the floor. As expected, in the match Master Lee applied 
his leg sweeps. The first couple of attempts missed but the third sweep struck 
Teacher Huang’s right leg. Although it did not sweep Teacher Huang off the floor, 
he did absorb the impact of the sweep.  Initially he felt pain in his leg and then 
later numbness. Although having to fight with an injured leg, Teacher Huang still 
eventually won. He told me it took him three years of continual treatment to get 
the swelling of his right leg to go down and for it to completely recover.
In the afternoon of the same day he went into the final, meeting Master Chung 
whom he had drawn in the preliminary round. Knowing Teacher Huang had an 
injury to his right leg, Chung continuously tried to attack the injured limb. Huang 
applied techniques from the Central Frame (a White Crane form) to avoid his 
attack. The match eventually ended with Master Chung winning the championship 
by one point and Teacher Huang was the runner up.

 128   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   129
The restless young man looking for a fight
This incident occurred when Teacher Huang was about 18 years old. One evening 
a friend visited him and complained that he had been beaten up by someone in 
the village. Teacher Huang was forbidden from going out in the evenings by his 
father. After his friend left, Teacher Huang went to his bedroom to wait for his 
father to go to bed so he could sneak out to settle the score for his friend. But 
his father was still sitting in the living room and so, getting restless, he locked 
his bedroom door and sneaked out through the window. He went to the guy’s 
house, asked him outside and gave him a beating, then came back to his bedroom 
through the window and went to bed. He told me, “If I hadn’t gone and beat the 
guy up, I probably wouldn’t be able to sleep that night,” I guess you have to be 
young and crazy in order to be old and wise!
Founding of Fujian White Crane system according to Teacher Huang
Fang Chee-Niang’s mother passed away when she was young. She was very close 
to her father who was a very proficient Shaolin martial art practitioner and Fang 
learned the art from him at a young age. When she grew up into a young lady, 
a rich landlord in the village took notice of her and wanted to take her in as a 
wife for his son. The landlord proposed to Fang’s father who turned down the 
proposal. Being a martial artist himself, the landlord challenged Fang’s father to a 
duel, such that if Fang’s father lost then she must become the daughter-in-law of 
the landlord. In the duel Fang’s father was killed and she was forced to married 
the landlord’s son.
On the wedding night, when Fang’s husband forced himself onto her, she fell back 
and delivered a kick to his throat, killing him instantly. The landlord’s family was 
wealthy and of high status in the village, and so as to not lose face, the landlord 
ordered the matter to be kept private within the household. Fang Chee-Niang 
was forced to observe three years of mourning, which was a custom at that time. 
Knowing that her father-in-law would kill her when the mourning period ended, 
she put more time into improving her martial art ability. One morning while doing 
laundry by the river she noticed a crane nearby and she used a rod to try and 
shove the crane away. As she was shoving the crane she noticed how it was able 
to avoid her shoving effortlessly. This went on for three months, and during this 
time she observed the movements of the crane and incorporated them into her 
martial art practice. 
On the morning of the end of the mourning, as she was walking along the corridor 
of the house, she saw her father-in-law standing in the doorway. She knew the 
time had come and her father-in-law wanted to take revenge for his son’s death. 
As she was approaching near to her father-in-law, he suddenly struck out at her 
with his right palm. Fang, using a movement she observed from the crane, stuck 
to the incoming attack and withdrew. Her father-in-law, on noticing that he had 
missed, immediately withdrew. Fang, using the momentum of his withdrawal 
force and her own force, struck her father-in-law on a vital point causing internal 
injuries which resulted in his death the following day. After the death of her 
father-in-law, she left the household and became a nun in a temple
As the years passed, there was drought and famine in the village and the landlord’s 
family fell into despair, and even the youngest son of the landlord had to resort 
to begging. The villagers suggested to him that he should look for his sister-in-law 
Fang Chee-Niang and learn martial art from her to make a living.
He went to the temple to look for Fang and ask her to impart her martial art 
knowledge to him. Fang Chee-Niang looked at the desperate state of her youngest 
brother-in-law and, knowing he was the only member of her husband’s family 
that ever treated her with kindness, she decided to take him in as her first disciple 
and impart to him the Fujian White Crane system that she had developed.
Tales of two White Crane masters
Master Pei was an official in the government and on his retirement he returned 
to his village. While he was walking down the path towards his house, a bull that 
was gazing nearby suddenly charged at him. Master Pei evaded the bull’s charge 
and struck its head with his palm, killing it instantly. When he arrived home, he 
realised that he had killed his family’s bull.
The son of a landlord was walking along the beach with two of his dogs. On the 
horizon he saw an old man who was also taking a stroll on the beach, so he 
decided to have some fun and sets his dogs on the old man. When both dogs 
were jumping onto the old man, he saw him raise both of his arms with a motion 
as if he was patting the dogs. The dogs lay motionless and the old man calmly 
walked away. The young man ran to his dogs, only to discover them dead and 
with all of their teeth broken.

 130   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   131
The Tàijíquán Period
First meeting with Professor Cheng Man Ching
Through an introduction of a mutual friend, Teacher Huang met Professor Cheng 
for the first time in 1950. During the meeting, Professor Cheng asked four of 
his top students to do pushing-hands with Teacher Huang. Because of his White 
Crane background, Teacher Huang could handle them easily. Professor Cheng, on 
seeing the ability of Teacher Huang, told him there is no need to study with him 
as his level of pushing-hands is good.
Second meeting with Professor Cheng
Two weeks later Teacher Huang visited Professor Cheng, and this time he brought 
along the White Crane book. He showed it to Professor Cheng, and on the first 
page was written “relax, relax, relax and mind, mind, mind”. After reading the 
book, Professor Cheng did some pushing-hands with Huang. Teacher Huang 
was surprised at the subtleness of Professor Cheng, and said it was like pushing 
into air, as there was nothing there for him to push. At that moment he realised 
that he had found what he had been looking for, for years. Professor Cheng told 
Teacher Huang that he would only accept him as a disciple if he agreed not to 
push or even think of pushing for four years, a condition that Teacher Huang 
readily accepted. For the next four years Teacher Huang only worked on yielding 
and neutralising not only with his fellow Tàijí students but also with his own 
White Crane students (he also started to teach his White Crane students Tàijí). 
At the end of the fourth year, on a Sunday class, Professor Cheng installed four 
poles in his garden and tied a rope around them, to make it into a ring. He told 
Teacher Huang that today he could push everybody, and he found that he could 
push everybody more effortlessly than four years ago. The following Sunday the 
other students of Professor Cheng boycotted the class complaining that Professor 
Cheng showed favouritism. Professor Cheng replied, “Huang Sheng Shyan listened 
to me. I asked him not to push for four years and he obeyed me, but you the rest 
of you didn’t.”
Leading Two Schools into Competition
In 1955, Teacher Huang made history by being a leader of two schools entering 
the same martial arts competition. He was the leader of Professor Cheng’s Tàijí 
school and also his own White Crane school.
To prepare his White Crane students (who also learned Tàijí from him) for the 
pushing-hands competition, three months before he had devised a training 
system for them. So for three months, every morning and evening, he and his 
students would do free pushing-hands on a smooth concrete surface of four feet 
by four feet, with soapy water poured onto it to make it slippery.
In the second round of the Tàijí pushing-hands competition almost all of Professor 
Cheng’s students were out of the competition. Teacher Huang asked one of 
his students, Chai Yi Hua, to throw his match so that one of professor’s Cheng 
students could go into the final round. In the final of the Tàijí pushing-hands, 
Teacher Huang (as Professor Cheng’s student) was declared the champion and 
two of his students came runner up and third.
On Professor Cheng’s birthday, which was soon after the competition, Professor 
Cheng’s students who could not believe that they had lost to Teacher Huang’s 
students, requested a rematch. After the dinner, they pushed hands behind closed 
doors, but the result was the same. Unfortunately, afterwards one of Teacher 
Huang’s students made a sarcastic remark towards Professor Cheng’s students. 
That was considered very disrespectful, especially since Teacher Huang was a 
student of Professor Cheng, and that according to the lineage custom, meant that 
Cheng’s Tàijí students were uncles to Huang’s White Crane students. So Teacher 
Huang asked the disrespectful student to leave his school.
At another open martial arts competition, in the first elimination round the 
organiser had arranged for Teacher Huang to meet with a Master Hong, hoping 
that Master Hong would eliminate Teacher Huang from the competition. However 
it turned out that Hong himself was knocked out by Teacher Huang. Teacher Huang 
later said that it was a pity that he and Hong met in the first round, otherwise 
Hong would have ended up in the top three
In the final of this open martial arts competition, Teacher Huang’s opponent 
was a Master Cheng. They fought to a draw in  normal time so extra time was 
required. In extra time, Teacher Huang’s palm touched his feet to stay in balance 
but the referee ruled that he had touched the floor, so the match was awarded to 
Master Cheng, with Teacher Huang as the runner up.

 132   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   133
Taking up Challenges on Professor Cheng’s behalf
Challenge one:
There was a Tàijí master called Li who trained in the park of Taipei and often 
bragged about his skill and belittled Professor Cheng and his students. Professor 
Cheng, with the help of his friend, decided to set him up with Teacher Huang 
(without Huang’s knowledge). Professor Cheng asked Huang to go to his friend’s 
house and collect an item for him. When he arrived Master Li was also there. 
Professor Cheng’s friend excuswed himself to go and get the item for Cheng. so 
that Teacher Huang and Master Li were left alone. Master Li not knowing that 
Huang was a student of Professor Cheng, Li start to brag about his skill and 
to criticise both Professor Cheng and his students. In defence of his teacher’s 
honour Huang told Master Li that he was one such student and challenged him. 
Teacher Huang gave Li a sound beating and in the process destroyed some pieces 
of furniture and a sliding wooden door. Conceding defeat, Li left and a little while 
later Professor Cheng’s friend returned. The first thing he said was, “Don’t worry 
about the damage, your teacher will pay for it.”  It was then that Teacher Huang 
realised that his teacher had set up the challenge. When he went back, Professor 
Cheng asked “Did you teach Li a lesson?”.
Challenge two:
During a gathering of martial artists on the rooftop of a five storey building in 
Taipei (in Taiwan some rooftops are flat and often converted into use as a training 
hall for martial art schools), one martial art master from a hard style challenged 
Professor Cheng. Teacher Huang stepped in and accepted the challenge on his 
teacher’s behalf. In the ensuing contest Teacher Huang nearly knocked the hard 
style master off the roof, but managed to grab him in the nick of time, preventing 
him from falling off the roof. After the gathering, Professor Cheng chided Teacher 
Huang for not letting the hard style master fall. Professor Cheng remarked, “Sheng 
Shyan, you should have left him fall off the roof, I will take responsibility for the 
consequence, you won’t get into trouble as I know the President (of Taiwan).
The tale of two Tàijí masters
An old man with long hair and a long beard was walking along a narrow road. 
Coming in the opposite direction was a young rider on horseback galloping 
towards him. The rider was shouting and signalling to the old man to get out of 
the way and it seemed that the horse was going to run into him. With the speed 
of lightning the old man side-stepped and, with a shoulder stroke, sent the horse 
collapsing on the floor, sending the rider flying into the bushes at the side of the 
road. The old man was none other than Wang Ts’ung-Yueh, the disciple of Chang 
Sang Feng.
One day, as the elders in the Chen village were teaching a group of students from 
the village the Chen family martial art. A stranger passed by and stood there for 
a moment and observed the class. As he turned around and walked away the 
stranger giggled. One of the elders in the class heard the giggles and approached 
the stranger saying, “How dare you giggle at us, are you belittling our martial 
art?”  The stranger shook his head, ignored the elder and started to walk away 
from him. Without warning the elder lunged forward and attacked the stranger. 
In the flash of a moment without realising what had hit him, the Chen’s elder was 
propelled off the ground and landed twenty feet away. Realising he had met an 
exceptional master, the elder knelt down in front of the stranger and begged him 
to accept him as a disciple. The stranger replied, “I am Jian Fa, disciple of Wang 
Ts’ung-Yueh, and I have some matters to attend to. I will be coming through this 
way again in two years’ time; perhaps then I will stay in your village to impart the 
art of Tàijíquán to you.”

 134   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   135
Glossary
àn 	
	
(按):	
push, forth movement of the grasp the sparrow’s tail 
sequence
bá  	 	
(拔):	
spread
baˇihuì	
(百會):	 crown meridian point usually referred to as níwán ,  
literal translation: hundred convergences 
caˇi 	 	
(採):	
pluck
chángquán	
(長拳):	 long fist - early name for tàijíquán
chén 		
(沉):	
sink
da¯ntián 	
(丹田):	 abdominal meridian point, 3cm below navel,  
literal translation: centre of elixir
dàlù 	
(大路):	 first moving step pushing-hands routine, literal meaning: big 
path
doˇngjìn 	
(懂勁):	 understanding energy
duì 	
(兌):	
western trigram, element: swamp or lake
fa¯jìn 	
(發勁):	 discharge/release relaxed force 
fàngso¯ng 	
(放鬆):	 let go / release
ge¯n 	
(根):	
base / joints
go¯ngfu¯	
(功夫)	
literally: deep understanding - common reference to Chinese 
martial arts and  often romanised as kung fu 
hán 	
(含):	
contain - not reveal
hu¯	
(呼):	
breathe
huìyīn 	
(會陰):	 perineum meridian point between anus and scrotum/vulva,  
literal translation: meeting of yīn
jí 	
(極):	
ultimate

 136   |    Wee Kee Jin
Tàijíquán – True to the Art     |   137
j 	
(擠):	
press, third movement of the grasp the sparrow’s tail 
sequence
jie¯jìn 	
(接勁):	 receiving energy	
jìn 	
(勁):	
relaxed force
jīng 	
(精):	
essence
jīnglù	
(精路):	 meridians, energy pathways
kaˇn 	
(坎):	
northern trigram, element: water
kào 	
(靠):	
lean-on
kuà 	
(胯):	
hips
ku¯n 	
(坤):	
southwestern trigram, element: earth
láogo¯ng	
(勞宮):	 palm meridian point where third finger touches when hand 
clenched, literal translation: work palace 
lí 	
(離):	
southern trigram, element: fire
lí 	
(厘):	
Chinese ‘Old System’ unit of measurement, a lí approximates 
to 576m and thousandth part of a tael
lì 	
(力):	
brute strength
lián 	
(連):	
connect
liè 	
( 列):	
split
lüˇ  	
(
):	
roll-back, second movement of the grasp the sparrow’s tail 
sequence
mìngmén	
(命門):	 lower spine meridian point between 2nd and 3rd lumbar 
vertebrae, literal translation: life entrance
nián 	
(黏):	
adhere
níwán 	
(泥丸):	 crown of head meridian point sometimes referred to as 
baˇihuì,  
literal translation: mud pill
péng	
(掤):	
ward-off, first movement of the grasp the sparrow’s tail 
sequence
qì 	
(氣):	
energy, vigour
quán 	
(拳):	
fist / boxing
qián 	
(乾):	
northwestern trigram, element: heaven
rén 	
(人):	
front mid-line meridian, literal translation: person / man
shén 	
(神):	
spirit	
shénmíng 	
(神明):	 enlightenment / spiritual clarity
shua¯ngzhòng 	(雙重):	 equal heaviness
sıˇ 	
(死):	
dead
shí 	
(實):	
substantial/full
suí 	
(隨):	
follow
tàijíquán 	
(太極拳):	 grand ultimate boxing
tie¯ 	
(貼):	
stick
tīngjìn 	
(聽經):	 listening energy
tuīshoˇu 	
(推手):	 pushing-hands
weˇilü´ 	
(尾閭):	 coccyx meridian point, literal translation: tail gate
wúwéi 	
(無偽):	 non action / natural process
xiaˇolù 	
(小路):	 second moving step pushing-hands routine,  
literal translation: small path
xı¯n 	
(心):	
heart/conscience
xu¯ 	
(虛):	
insubstantial/empty
xùn 	
(巽):	
southeastern trigram, element: wind
ya¯o 	
(腰):	
waist
yáng 	
(陽):	
male principle: expansive
yì 	
(意):	
mind intention
yīn 	
(陰):	
female principle: recessive	
yoˇngquán 	
(湧泉):	 sole meridian point, in depression between pads of 2nd and 
3rd toes, literal translation: bubbling well
yùzheˇn 	
(玉枕):	 occipital meridian point, literal translation: jade pillow
zhèn 	
(震):	
eastern trigram, element: thunder
zho¯ngzhèng	
(中正):	 central equilibrium	
zhoˇu 	
(肘):	
elbow-strike
Note: 	
Tael and catty are ancient Chinese units to measure weight. 
	
16 taels equal one catty (one tael is equals approximately 15 grams), 
	
	and one catty equals approximately 240 grams).


